nother day, another ceasefire. For the ever-shrinking number of civilians still left in Khartoum, Sudan’s war-wracked capital, it is becoming a wearily familiar pattern. The latest truce between Sudan’s warring factions, announced by America’s secretary of state, Antony Blinken, shortly before midnight on April 24th, was supposed to last 72 hours. The following morning residents once again reported hearing heavy gunfire and explosions.

Listen to this story. Enjoy more audio and podcasts on iOS or Android.
Listen to this story

Save time by listening to our audio articles as you multitask
OK
Since April 15th, the city has been the centre of a battle between the two most powerful figures in Sudan’s military government. General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, the country’s de facto leader since a coup in 2019, leads the army. Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo, a warlord, heads the Rapid Support Forces (rsf), a paramilitary unit that grew out of the Janjaweed militias accused of genocidal acts in Darfur in the mid-2000s. Their fight for control of Khartoum and the country has already left hundreds of civilians dead and many more injured or homeless. Now the fear is that these two rival armies will level the city.


In the days before the ceasefire—the fourth so far—almost all foreign diplomats were evacuated. American special forces in Chinook helicopters rescued 100 embassy staff in less than an hour on April 22nd. Britain’s Royal Air Force followed suit the next day. On April 24th a convoy of more than 750 un officials and aid-workers arrived safely in the Red Sea city of Port Sudan. Earlier a French diplomatic convoy had been attacked, and a Qatari one looted, on the same route.

Thousands of Sudanese civilians have also escaped. Some have gone by bus to neighbouring countries such as Egypt, where large numbers are now gathered at the border. Others have fled to the countryside around Khartoum. Hamid Khalafallah, a political analyst, chose to stay in the capital with his family. But he reckons about a third or more of the population may already have abandoned the city. Those who remain risk death “by bullets or by hunger”, says one fearful resident. Partly because rsf forces have been taking over private homes for use as fortifications, whole districts have been reduced to ashes. Banks are closed. Hospitals have been looted and bombed. Food, water and medical supplies are rapidly running out.



The vast western region of Darfur, home to Mr Dagalo and the rsf, is ablaze. Some 20,000 civilians have crossed into Chad. Fighting around the city of el-Geneina has killed nearly 200 people and forced thousands from their homes in recent days; police there reportedly called on civilians to arm and defend themselves.

In south Darfur, militias linked to the rsf have taken advantage of the security vacuum to rob and attack people in their homes, says Mohammed Osman of Alberdi, a Sudanese rights group based in the city. Soldiers from the national army are also stopping and sometimes beating people from the Arab tribes associated with the rsf. This is a troubling sign of “the tribal war which is to come”, he warns. On April 24th, António Guterres, the un secretary-general, urged the un Security Council to do whatever it could “to pull Sudan back from the edge of the abyss”.

Amid the gloom there are faint glimmers of hope. In el-Fasher, the capital of North Darfur, religious leaders and local activists brokered a truce between the army and the rsf units fighting there. During the most recent ceasefire in Khartoum the fighting died down for a while. On April 22nd, a weary-sounding General Burhan suggested the two sides sit and talk. But it is hard to believe he is serious. After all, barely half a day into the ceasefire his drones were back in the sky and bombing the capital once again. 
Sudan appears to be trapped in an endless cycle of bloody coups and counter-coups. Since independence in 1956 the country has endured six coups and about ten failed attempts, by some measures the worst record in Africa. The latest was the overthrow in October 2021 of a transitional civilian-led government by a military junta led by General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan. Blessed with ample natural resources, notably oil and gold, rich agricultural lands, a sophisticated education system (largely inherited from the British) and a robust civil society, Sudan has nonetheless been plagued by genocide, famine and poverty. These seven books explain how and why Sudan went so horribly wrong.

Sudan’s Unfinished Democracy. By Willow Berridge, Justin Lynch, Raga Makawi and Alex de Waal. Oxford University Press; 280 pages; $30. C Hurst & Co; £22

Since South Sudan won independence from Sudan in 2011 the former has claimed more attention, as it plunged quickly into its very own civil war. Recent texts on Sudan, therefore, are relatively rare. “Sudan’s Unfinished Democracy” is the best of them. It is the only book that deals in detail with the people’s revolution in 2019, led largely by women, that ousted the Islamist regime of Omar al-Bashir and led to the transitional government, which itself was overthrown. One of the authors, Alex de Waal, is probably the most prominent contemporary authority on the country. The writers give an account of the rise of Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo (known as Hemedti) from poverty in Darfur to become the ruthless leader of the Rapid Support Forces (RSF), a rise that Mr Bashir himself encouraged to create a counterweight to the regular army. Here is the root cause of the competition for power between the RSF and General Burhan, the army’s chief, which erupted into war in April 2023. Mr Bashir’s overthrow was a moment of hope for a more democratic and inclusive Sudan. It has since been extinguished by terror and violence, much of it carried out by the RSF.


Sudan, South Sudan, & Darfur: What Everyone Needs to Know. By Andrew Natsios. Oxford University Press; 280 pages; $16.95 and £10.99

Andrew Natsios’s summary of Sudan’s political history is short and damning: “a story of rebellions, insurrections, and civil wars, layered on top of each other”. That suggests that many painful years lie ahead even if the current armed conflict can be brought to an end. Mr Natsios, a former American government official, knows Sudan well. He was head of USAID, America’s development-aid agency, from 2001-06, and then President George Bush’s special envoy to Sudan. His short, accessible but comprehensive account of why Sudan has been beset by so much violence is laced with illuminating profiles of some of the country’s most significant personalities. These include John Garang, leader of the south in its long civil war against the north, and the Islamist leader Hassan al-Turabi. The book only takes the story of Sudan up to 2011, when the south voted to secede in a referendum, but it remains one of the best introductions to the country’s pathologies.

A History of Modern Sudan. By Robert Collins. Cambridge University Press; 360 pages; $34.99 and £25.99

This book, by an American academic, is probably the best narrative study of the country ever written. Robert Collins draws on his own and others’ scholarship to give a rich and detailed view of Sudan from the 1820s up to 2000 or so. Although he wrote before the conflict in Darfur, which started in 2003, there’s an appendix in recent editions dealing with the causes of the war. Collins writes insightfully about internal Sudanese politics and the regimes of the 1970s and 1980s as well as about the murderous dictatorship of Mr Bashir. He tells the full story of the “Islamist revolution” that sustained Mr Bashir in office before it became little more than a thuggish kleptocracy. Many books on Sudan are pretty hard to read: local authors, in particular, tend to draw readers into the labyrinth of party politics in Khartoum. Collins, however, never loses sight of the most important themes.

The Sudan Handbook. Edited by John Ryle, Justin Willis, Suliman Baldo and Jok Madut Jok. Boydell & Brewer; 240 pages; $29.95. James Currey; £19.99


The authors of the “The Sudan Handbook” are the founders of the Rift Valley Institute (RVI), a fabulous repository of knowledge about eastern and central Africa founded in 2001. The institute has run annual field courses on Sudan and South Sudan, providing an essential education for many novice diplomats and aid workers. This volume brings together 18 essays by experts who have lectured for these courses or worked with the RVI. They include Gerard Prunier, author of several works on Congo and Rwanda, who writes about Sudan’s tangled relations with its neighbours; Laura James, who gives an excellent account of how oil came to play such a large role in Sudan’s affairs; Abdel Salam Sidahmed, who writes about Islamist parties in Sudan; and Mr Ryle himself, who concludes on an appropriately downbeat note. The volume also includes maps, a chronology and brief profiles of “key figures in Sudanese history, culture and politics”.

War of Visions. By Francis Deng. Brookings Institution Press; 591 pages; $31.99 and £25

Francis Deng is an example of what might have been. A Christian from southern Sudan, unusually he was a minister in several governments headed by northern Muslim politicians during those short periods when Sudan looked as if it might become a multiethnic and religiously plural polity. After South Sudan won independence in 2011 Mr Deng became the new country’s first ambassador to the UN. “War of Visions”, published long before, in 1995, is the best analysis of Sudan’s all-consuming identity politics by someone who has spent a lifetime trying to surmount its divisions. Essentially a work of anthropology, the book combines cool, academic detachment with an unrivalled knowledge of all the peoples of Sudan. His conclusions are dated now, but his adroit analysis of the country’s tribal politics remains relevant.

Season of Migration to the North. By Tayeb Salih. Translated by Denys Johnson-Davies. New York Review of Books; 184 pages; $14.95. Penguin Classics; £7.99

Often hailed as one the best novels in Arabic of the 20th century, this is a classic of post-colonial literature by Sudan’s most revered author. Published in 1966, and translated into English in 1969, “Season of Migration to the North” is the haunting, enigmatic story of a Sudanese man who returns to his native country after many years studying in Europe, particularly in England. He is lionised in his village for his learning and supposed sophistication, but as the novel unfolds it’s clear that he was traumatised by his time abroad. He cannot fit comfortably back into Sudanese life. The book’s exploration of the clash between the values of Islam and those of “the land of hanky-panky”, as one character calls Europe, is as germane as ever.

Also try:

Our former Africa editor has written a book about Sudan, which shows how its conflicts are rooted in the country’s imbalances of wealth and power. Read about the conflict that broke out in April 2023 here and here. This article examined the parlous state of the country before the latest fighting. In our sister magazine, 1843, a woman writes about her desperate search for safety from the fighting.