The fighting that has erupted in the Sudanese capital, Khartoum, and elsewhere in the country is a direct result of a vicious power struggle within the country's military leadership.

The clashes are between the regular army and a paramilitary force called the Rapid Support Forces (RSF).

Where is Sudan?
Sudan is in north-east Africa and is one of the largest countries on the continent, covering 1.9 million square kilometres.

It is also one the poorest countries in the world, with its 46 million people living on an average annual income of $750 (£606) a head.

The population of Sudan is predominantly Muslim and the country's official languages are Arabic and English.

ADVERTISEMENT

Map of Sudan showing major roads
Who is fighting who in Sudan?
Since the 2021 coup, Sudan has been run by a council of generals, led by the two military men at the centre of this dispute:

Gen Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, the head of the armed forces and in effect the country's president
And his deputy and leader of the RSF, Gen Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, better known as Hemedti.
Gen Dagalo amongst supporters
IMAGE SOURCE,GETTY IMAGES
Image caption,
Gen Dagalo, head of the RSF, among supporters
They have disagreed on the direction the country is going in and the proposed move towards civilian rule.

The main sticking points are plans to include the 100,000-strong RSF into the army, and who would then lead the new force.

Why did the fighting in Sudan start?
The shooting began on 15 April following days of tension as members of the RSF were redeployed around the country in a move that the army saw as a threat.

There had been some hope that talks could resolve the situation but these never happened.

It is disputed who fired the first shot but the fighting swiftly escalated in different parts of the country with more than 400 civilians dying, according to the World Health Organization.

Why have civilians got caught up?
Even though the conflict appears to be around the control of key installations, much of it is happening in urban areas and civilians have become the unwitting victims.

It is not exactly clear where the RSF bases are, but it seems that their fighters moved into densely populated areas.

The Sudanese air force has mounted air strikes in the capital, a city of more than six million people, which is likely to have led to civilian casualties.

Several ceasefires have been announced to allow people to escape the fighting but these have not been observed.

What are the Rapid Support Forces?
The RSF was formed in 2013 and has its origins in the notorious Janjaweed militia that brutally fought rebels in Darfur, where they were accused of ethnic cleansing.

Since then, Gen Dagalo has built a powerful force that has intervened in conflicts in Yemen and Libya. He has also developed economic interests including controlling some of Sudan's gold mines.

The RSF has been accused of human rights abuses, including the massacre of more than 120 protesters in June 2019.

Such a strong force outside the army has been seen as a source of instability in the country.

The RSF - Sudan's ruthless gold mercenaries
Who is Gen Dagalo
Why is the military in charge of Sudan?
This fighting is the latest episode in bouts of tension that followed the 2019 ousting of long-serving President Omar al-Bashir, who came to power in a coup in 1989.

There were huge street protests calling for an end to his near-three decade rule and the army mounted a coup to get rid of him.

But civilians continued to campaign for the introduction of democracy.

General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan
IMAGE SOURCE,AFP
Image caption,
Sudan's military leader, Gen Abdel Fattah al-Burhan
A joint military-civilian government was then established but that was overthrown in another coup in October 2021, when Gen Burhan took over.

And since then the rivalry between Gen Burhan and Gen Dagalo has intensified.

A framework deal to put power back in the hands of civilians was agreed last December but talks to finalise the details have failed.

What do the two sides want?
Gen Dagalo has said, in a series of tweets, that Gen Burhan's government were "radical Islamists" and that he and the RSF were "fighting for the people of Sudan to ensure the democratic progress for which they have so long yearned".

Many find this message hard to believe, given the brutal track record of the RSF.

Gen Burhan has said he supports the idea of returning to civilian rule, but that he will only hand over power to an elected government. Some suspect him of having links to ex-President Bashir and his allies, which the army has denied.

There are suspicions that both generals want to hang on to their positions of power, unwilling to losing the wealth and influence that go with them.

What are other countries doing?
There are fears that the fighting could further fragment the country, worsen political turbulence and draw in neighbouring states.

Diplomats, who have played a crucial role in trying to urge a return to civilian rule, have been trying to find a way to get the two generals to talk.

Soon after the fighting began a regional bloc agreed to send three presidents - from Kenya, South Sudan and Djibouti - to Khartoum, but the mission never happened.

The UK, US and EU have all called for a ceasefire and talks to resolve the crisis and many countries are now focused on trying to get their citizens out.
Each morning since April 15th, residents of Khartoum, Sudan’s capital, have woken to the thunder of air strikes and the crackle of nearby gunfire. In just the first four days of fighting between the forces of two rival Sudanese generals, nearly 300 people have been killed (most of them civilians) and more than 2,600 injured. Armed men have been raiding and looting homes. “It’s like ‘Call of Duty’,” says a resident whose house was struck by a bullet. Food, water and medical supplies are starting to run out.

Listen to this story. Enjoy more audio and podcasts on iOS or Android.
Listen to this story

Save time by listening to our audio articles as you multitask
OK
The warning signs of an impending crisis were not hard to read. For months tensions had been building between the two most powerful figures in Sudan’s military government: General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, Sudan’s de facto leader since a coup in 2019; and Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo (better known as Hemedti), a warlord. He is the leader of the Rapid Support Forces (rsf), a paramilitary unit that grew out of the Janjaweed militias accused of genocidal acts of murder and rape in Darfur. Many warned of an impending clash between the rsf and the government’s Sudanese Armed Forces (saf) loyal to General Burhan.


The crisis worsened fast in the morning of April 13th, when residents of Merowe, in northern Sudan, saw soldiers from the rsf rolling through town and taking up positions around the airport, a base for fighter jets. In response, saf soldiers surrounded the rsf men and reportedly ordered them to withdraw. Soon the government warned of an imminent confrontation between the two forces, as did representatives of America, the European Union and several other Western governments. Over the next 24 hours, diplomats dashed between the two camps trying to head off a conflict. In Khartoum, residents braced for the worst.

It came early in the morning of April 15th as fighting broke out between the saf and rsf. Each side accused the other of shooting first. According to the national army, Mr Dagalo’s forces had launched a rebellion against the state. The rsf replied that the army had in fact launched a “sweeping attack” against its members. Mr Dagalo called his boss a “criminal” who would either be captured or “die like a dog”. Both sides claimed to have swiftly gained the upper hand.

Within hours of the first shots being fired, tanks were driving through the streets of central Khartoum as fighter jets screamed overhead. As the air force bombed rsf bases, the rsf attacked the international airport; videos circulating online showed thick clouds of smoke rising from the tarmac. Clashes have occurred in the area around the state broadcaster and the presidential palace. Soldiers from both sides fired rockets near residential homes where civilians cowered. “We are hearing very heavy artillery,” said one resident of central Khartoum by text message. “The voices and sounds are terrifying.”


Fighting has also spread to other parts of Sudan (see map). Almost immediately the rsf claimed to have captured the airport at Merowe. Heavy gunfire was also reported near the el-Obeid air base in the North Kordofan region, as well as in multiple places in Darfur; three un aid workers were killed in clashes between the two armies in the city of el-Fasher. It is still unclear whether the conflict will blow up into a full-scale war. But neither man appears inclined to stop the violence and negotiate. Temporary ceasefires brokered by mediators have collapsed in minutes.

Behind the latest clashes is a struggle for power between General Burhan and Mr Dagalo, and between the complex constellations of political parties, militias, rebel leaders and foreign powers allied to them. This is a fight over who will control the direction of Sudan’s political transition, which began four years ago with the overthrow of the brutal Islamist regime led by the former dictator, Omar al-Bashir.



Democracy crushed
Mr Bashir was forced out of power in 2019 after months of protests led by an alliance of pro-democracy activists. Sensing Mr Bashir’s time was up, his own generals—among them General Burhan and Mr Dagalo—staged a coup to eject him. Protest leaders and the armed forces then struck a power-sharing deal which was supposed to lead to elections and a civilian government. But Mr Bashir’s divide-and-rule tactics, honed over his three decades in charge, left behind a time-bomb: a motley group of militias and armed factions now jockeying for power.

The most powerful and prominent is the rsf. Mr Bashir created it as a counterweight to the army and the intelligence service, with its own command structure and funding. The man at its helm, Mr Dagalo, makes no secret of his ambition to rule.