HMAR/1.1/1 Handbooks of Management Accounting Research Volume 1, 2006, Pages 3–26 1. Management Accounting: A Bibliographic Study James W. Hesford Sung-Han (Sam) Lee Wim A. Van der Stede S. Mark Young doi:10.1016/S1751-3243(06)01001-7 Chapter 1.01 Management Accounting - A Bibliographic Study James W. Hesford Cornell University, School of Hotel Administration Sung-Han (Sam) Lee University of Southern California, Leventhal School of Accounting Wim A. Van der Stede University of Southern California, Leventhal School of Accounting S. Mark Young University of Southern California, Leventhal School of Accounting HMAR/1.1/2 Chapter 1.01 Management Accounting - A Bibliographic Study Abstract The 20-year period from 1981 to 2000 was a period of change for the field of management accounting. During this period new topics were investigated, new journals came into existence, and different research methods were emphasized. This chapter has two parts. The first part charts the field. To do this we split the 20-year period into two decades and then compare the kinds of topics studied, the research methods used, and source disciplines employed across 10 journals in accounting and between decades. The second part focuses on the community of accounting scholars, analyzing citations and social network measures that reveal the links between, and influence of, individuals in management accounting research. 1. Introduction and Overview The field of management accounting research has expanded since the early 1980s due to the emergence of new topics to investigate (Kaplan, 1983, 1993; Johnson & Kaplan, 1987; Young & Selto, 1991), the introduction of new journals focusing exclusively on publishing management accounting research, and calls to examine management accounting phenomena from multiple disciplinary perspectives (Baiman, 1982, 1990; Cooper, 1983; Covaleski, Dirsmith, & Samuel, 1996; Hopwood, 1978a, 1978b, 1979, 1983; Macintosh & Scapens, 1990) using multiple methods (Kaplan, 1984, 1986). Accordingly, we believe it is useful to provide an analysis of the state of the field as part of this comprehensive handbook. Specifically, we examine the state and evolution of the management accounting field in terms of the topics studied, research methods employed, and source disciplines relied on in 916 management accounting articles in 10 journals over a 20-year period (1981-2000).㸯 Our approach to this examination is twofold, which we label “charting the field” and “analyzing the community.” We chart the field by showing the “market share” of management accounting as a subfield within accounting, as well as the “journal share” of each of the 10 journals in terms of the num- HMAR/1.1/3 ber of management accounting articles they publish. We do this for the entire 20-year period, as well as by decade (1981-1990 vs. 1991-2000) to show changes over time. We find that 28% of all accounting articles in the 10 journals during our study period are in the area of management accounting. A breakdown of the sample by decade indicates an increase in the number of management accounting articles in the last decade due to the introduction of four new journals (BRIA, JMAR, MAR, and RAS). The other journals, except JAE, however, published relatively fewer management accounting articles over time. In addition, the combined share of management accounting articles in four of the five most influential journals in accounting (about 29% in CAR, JAE, JAR, and TAR combined) is about the same as AOS’s share alone (28%). Finally, half of the management accounting articles appeared in AOS (28%) and MAR (22%). To examine whether the expansion in the number of articles has also led to an expansion of ideas in terms of topics studied, methods applied, and/or source disciplines relied on, we categorize all 916 management accounting articles along three dimensions: topics, methods, and source disciplines. For each of these dimensions, we again chart the field for the entire 20-year period and by decade. We also analyze topic, method, and discipline coverage by journal, and crosstabulate topics, methods, and source disciplines. Our data show that about 70% of the management accounting articles focus on control, 20% on cost, and 10% on a range of other topics. The most recent decade exhibited a slight change from control to cost topics, particularly those addressing cost allocation issues. The biggest changes, however, took place within the control area, with a shift in topics from budgeting and organizational control to performance measurement and evaluation. Our data also suggest that analytical, survey, and experimental methods are the dominant research methods, with about 18, 16, and 13% of the management accounting studies employing these methods, respectively. HMAR/1.1/4 Frameworks that provide perspectives on management accounting issues also are published frequently, with about 20% of the management accounting studies taking this approach. As a percentage, we observe a decline in the use of frameworks and experiments in the most recent decade, and an increase in archival, case, and field research methods, with each of these three methods being used by about 10% of the studies. Finally, we find that economics is the dominant source discipline in management accounting research (43%), followed by sociology (40%) and psychology (15%). The reliance on psychology decreased in the most recent decade with a shift towards economics and sociology. Cross-tabulations show that AOS and MAR show a greater tendency to publish case, field, and survey studies that draw on sociology compared to the other eight journals, which tend to publish more analytical, archival, and experimental studies that draw on economics. The data also reveal that the analytical method dominates economics-based management accounting research, by far, followed by the archival method as a distant second. Survey, field, and case methods dominate sociology-based research. Experiments, followed by survey methods, dominate psychology-based research. Finally, the data suggest that cost is dominated by economic thought, whereas control, while drawing mostly on sociology, also draws on economics and psychology. We conclude our charting of the field with a discussion of several characteristics of authors, such as the extent to which they publish multiple articles in multiple journals addressing multiple topics from multiple disciplinary perspectives using multiple methods. We find that 67% of the authors published only one article across the journals in our sample. Although we do not find that authors with more than one article concentrate on publishing their work in one journal on a single topic using a single method, the data suggest that authors tend to have a source discipline concentration, however. HMAR/1.1/5 The second part of the paper focuses on analyzing the community of management accounting scholars. To this end, we analyze citations using several social network measures that reveal the links between, and influence of, individuals in management accounting research. We extend prior citation-based studies in accounting in several ways (McRae, 1974; Brown & Gardner, 1985a, 1985b; Brown & Huefner, 1994; Mensah, Hwang, & Wu, 2004). First, our study focuses solely on management accounting. Second, we hand collect citations for articles in five of the 10 journals that are not included in the Social Science Citation Index, and thus, have not been analyzed previously.㸰 Third, our analysis spans 20 years – a period much longer than previous studies. Finally, we merge citations with the descriptive data discussed in the first part of the study which enables us to show the influence of not only articles and their authors, but also topics, methods, and source disciplines. We find that the control literature draws heavily on its own area, with 84% of the citations going to other control articles. Cost draws more than half of its citations from the cost literature (56%), but also draws heavily (39%) on the control literature. Examining methods, we find that most articles draw on articles using a variety of methods, except analytical articles with 78% of their citations to other analytical articles. Archival articles cite analytical studies only 14% of the time, and experimental and survey-based articles cite analytical work even less. Regarding source disciplines, we find that the economics-based literature draws heavily on itself (76%), with only few citations to sociology (12%) and psychology (6%). Articles based on psychology draw quite evenly from psychology, sociology, and economics. Sociology, like economics, tends to draw heavily on its own work (65%), and it also draws to a greater extent on economics (16%) than on psychology (8%). Thus, except for psychology, it appears that the disciplinary paradigms HMAR/1.1/6 are fairly focused, not drawing on the insights from the accounting literature using different source disciplines. We also create a matrix of the citations between the 898 authors in our database. We use this matrix, and transformations thereof, to calculate several social network measures that assess communication networks between scholars, instead of using citations merely to determine rankings of individuals, institutions, journals, or articles. Furthermore, we present directed graphs to visualize these communications among the management accounting scholars. One finding of these various social network analyses is the existence of two quite distinct subnetworks in management accounting research – one around AOS and MAR, and the other around the eight journals edited in North America. Specifically, we find that the majority of scholars publish in either, but not both, subnetworks. Moreover, authors publishing in either subnetwork tend to cite articles within the same subnetwork more than articles in the other subnetwork. But we also find distinct networks of management accounting scholars within each subnetwork that appear to be based on topic, method, or source discipline with relatively little communications across them. Section 2 presents the database and method we use to chart the field of management accounting in terms of topics, methods, and source disciplines. Section 3 presents the results of several citation-based network analyses to describe the community of management accounting scholars. Section 4 summarizes and concludes. 2. Charting the Field 2.1. Article Selection We identify articles between 1981 and 2000 in 10 English-language journals that represent outlets in which management accounting research has been prominently published: Accounting HMAR/1.1/7 Organizations and Society (AOS), Behavioral Research in Accounting (BRIA), Contemporary Accounting Research (CAR), Journal of Accounting and Economics (JAE), Journal of Accounting Literature (JAL), Journal of Accounting Research (JAR), Journal of Management Accounting Research (JMAR), Management Accounting Research (MAR), Review of Accounting Studies (RAS), and The Accounting Review (TAR). Since JMAR and MAR focus exclusively on management accounting research, we include all articles in these two journals. For the other eight journals, we select only management accounting articles published by them.㸱 We exclude articles on top executive compensation using publicly-available, large-sample archival data because it is difficult to unambiguously classify research in this area as management accounting (as opposed to financial accounting) research. We also exclude research notes, book reviews, editorials, and discussion articles. We choose the 20-year period between 1981 and 2000 primarily because many advances in the field were born or flourished during this period, such as activity-based costing (Cooper, 1987), “Japanese” management accounting (Hiromoto, 1988), “strategic” management accounting and control (Bromwich, 1990; Dent, 1990; Shank, 1989; Shank & Govindarajan, 1993), and the balanced scorecard (Kaplan & Norton, 1992), among other new topics (e.g., see Johnson & Kaplan, 1987). Finally, we collect data through the year 2000, rather than more recent years, to allow articles to have sufficient time to be digested, and cited, by the academic community. The selection process yields 916 articles. For journals available online, we record bibliographic data by article consisting of journal name, publication year, pages, author name(s), institutional affiliation(s) at time of publication, as well as each article’s reference list. For articles not available online, we record these data manually. HMAR/1.1/8 Table 1, Panel A, shows that about 28% of all accounting articles in the 10 journals during the entire 20-year period are management accounting. A breakdown of the sample by decade, however, indicates an increase in the number of management accounting articles published in the last decade due primarily to the introduction of four new journals: BRIA (started in 1989), JMAR (1989), MAR (1990), and RAS (1996). The other journals, except JAE, however, published relatively less management accounting articles over time. [INSERT TABLE 1] Panel B shows that over the 20-year period, about half of the management accounting articles appeared in AOS (28%) and MAR (22%). Consistent with the inferences from Panel A, most journals exhibit a decrease across the two decades in their share of management accounting articles because they published fewer (AOS, JAL, JAR, and TAR) or about the same number (CAR) of management accounting articles, even though the absolute number of management accounting articles increased. As previously mentioned, JAE published a larger number of management accounting articles over the past 10 years, increasing its market share of management accounting articles (6%) beyond that of JAR (5%), but below that of TAR (9%). It is noteworthy, however, that the combined share of management accounting articles of these three journals in the most recent decade is still smaller than AOS’s share alone (21%). In summary, Table 1 indicates that the growth in the number of management accounting articles over time came primarily from the introduction of new journals (BRIA, JMAR, MAR, RAS), two of which dedicated exclusively to management accounting (JMAR and MAR). In all other established journals, except JAE, however, the number and share of management accounting articles decreased over time. HMAR/1.1/9 2.2. Article Classification Guided by prior research (Brown & Gardner, 1985a, 1985b; Brown, Gardner, & Vasarhelyi, 1987; Shields, 1997), we classify each article by topic, method, and source discipline (using the same protocol as described in footnote 3). Our classification scheme is similar to that developed by Shields (1997). 㸲 Most topic, method, and source discipline categorizations are selfexplanatory, but when they are not, we explain them below. Topics. The starting point for classifying management accounting articles based on research topic is the generally accepted distinction between cost (accounting) and (management) control, allowing for other specific topics, such as accounting information systems, to be classified separately as other. An iterative process then further divides cost into cost allocation, other cost accounting topics, and the study of cost practices. Cost allocation articles involve studies focused on the allocation of overhead and joint costs, cost driver analysis, activity-based costing, and capacity costs. Other cost accounting topics include, for example, the study of cost variances and the use of cost information for decision making. Finally, studies of cost practices deal with the emergence, development, or decline of cost systems over time or in specific places (e.g., country-specific cost accounting systems). We also classify control into further subcategories: budgeting, capital budgeting, performance measurement and evaluation, organizational control, and international control. Budgeting includes articles focused on budget target setting, budget participation, and budget-related (dysfunctional) behaviors. Capital budgeting articles examine investment decisions, including resource allocation decisions and issues of opportunity, relevant, and sunk costs. Performance measurement and evaluation involves the study of the various aspects of performance measure- HMAR/1.1/10 ment and incentive system design (such as the performance measures used for incentives), as well as their consequences for organizational behavior and performance. The organizational control subcategory is the least specific and includes all articles broadly related to control systems in organizations not otherwise classifiable in the other control-specific categories, such as international control, which deals with management control systems related to cultural differences across countries and the effect of national culture on organizational control. Finally, we classify other topics into seven subcategories: accounting information system (AIS), benchmarking, (total) quality management (TQM), just-in-time (JIT), research methods, strategic management, and transfer pricing. Benchmarking, TQM, JIT, research methods, and transfer pricing are topics that are easily distinguishable. However, many AIS and strategic management articles are somewhat similar to organizational control (discussed above). While both AIS and organizational control examine the organizational impacts of accounting systems, AIS is different in its focus on computer-based accounting information systems instead of management control systems more broadly. Strategic management examines the linkage between organization strategy and management control systems. Strategic management articles thus focus on the link between management control and strategy specifically, whereas organizational control examines management control in organizational contexts without specifically focusing on strategy. Table 2, Panel A, shows that approximately 70% of the management accounting articles focus on control, 20% on cost, and 10% on a range of other topics. This topical distribution is quite stable over time, except for a slight shift in the most recent decade from control to cost topics, particularly those addressing cost allocations. The biggest changes, however, are in the control area, with a shift in topics from budgeting and organizational control to performance measure- HMAR/1.1/11 ment and evaluation. Other topics showing increases in journal space are transfer pricing and studies of research methods. [INSERT TABLE 2] Methods. We classify articles based on nine research methods: analytical, archival, case, experiment, field, framework, review, survey, and other/multiple (which includes simulation). Analytical, archival, experiment, survey, and simulation are research methods that are easily distinguishable. To distinguish field from case studies, we follow Birnberg, Shields, and Young (1990). Case studies involve the investigation of contemporary (management accounting) phenomena including people, procedures, and structures within a single organization, whereas field studies involve the investigation of such phenomena in two or more organizations. In other words, the main distinction between case and field studies is that the latter investigate (management accounting) phenomena thoroughly across different organizations to derive deep insights, instead of just focusing on one organization. Field studies, however, differ from archival studies because they employ multiple information sources including archival data, interviews, surveys, and/or observation. Framework studies involve the development of new conceptual frameworks providing new perspectives. They are different from review articles because they draw from, and combine, multiple perspectives and information sources such as empirical facts, theoretical or practical observations, prior literature (in other areas or disciplines), supplemented with the authors’ own synthesis and perspectives, whereas review articles mainly review and synthesize prior literature. Table 2, Panel B, shows that across the 20-year period, analytical, survey, and experiments are the three dominant research methods. A number of articles also develop frameworks for organizing the literature. Analytical, survey, and experimental research methods, as well as frame- HMAR/1.1/12 works, remain dominant over time, but their use in management accounting research is decreasing (particularly the use of experiments). The use of archival, case, and field research methods, on the other hand, is increasing. In fact, over the two decades, each of these methods has become as prominent as experiments in management accounting. We note, however, that the increase in case/field study articles is largely attributable to the introduction of MAR in 1990 (with 42% of its articles being case/field studies; see Table 3, Panel B). Overall, the relatively greater use of framework, survey, analytical, and experimental methods, and the relatively lower use of archival methods perhaps signify the difficulty of gaining access to existing data of relevance to management accounting research. Source Disciplines. We distinguish five source disciplines: economics, psychology, sociology, production and operations management (POM), and history. If there are multiple source disciplines, we determine the primary source discipline based on the article’s focus. Economics includes articles relying on industrial organization, microeconomics, and agency theory. Psychology covers social psychology, cognitive psychology, and organizational behavior. Sociology includes organizational theory (e.g., contingency theory, institutional theory) and sociology. POM encompasses articles that focus on linear programming and process control, mostly in manufacturing settings. Finally, history captures articles that study the emergence and development of management accounting systems and practices at a specific time and place. Table 2, Panel C, shows that economics (43%) is the dominant source discipline on which management accounting research relies, followed by sociology (40%) and psychology (15%). However, sociology and psychology combined are used more commonly as source disciplines in management accounting than economics. We note that the reliance on psychology as a source discipline in management accounting appears to have decreased over time, whereas the reliance HMAR/1.1/13 on economics and sociology increased. The drop in the reliance on psychology as a source discipline perhaps is linked to the decrease in the use of the experimental method observed in Panel B, which is the most commonly used method in psychology-based management accounting studies (see Table 5). 2.3. Journal Characteristics Table 3, Panel A, tabulates research topics by journal. It suggests that 77% of the management accounting articles in AOS and MAR focus on control topics. While control topics are also the focus of the majority of the management accounting articles in the other eight journals (64%), the latter have a greater proportion of their management accounting articles focused on cost accounting topics (25%) compared to AOS and MAR (14%). Also, more than half (54%) of the 644 control-focused articles were published in just two journals – AOS and MAR. [INSERT TABLE 3] Panel B reveals that case, field, framework, and survey-based research methods dominate in AOS and MAR, whereas the other journals publish more analytical, archival, and experimental methods. Analytical research finds a home primarily in JAR, TAR, CAR, and RAS. More than 90% of the management accounting articles in RAS are analytical studies. Almost half of the survey-based articles appear in AOS, with the others finding a home primarily in MAR, JMAR, and to a lesser extent in TAR. Almost all case and field-based articles are in AOS and MAR, and the rest in JMAR. JAE, TAR and JMAR publish the majority of the archival management accounting articles. Experiments have the broadest appeal across journals, with relatively good placement in TAR, AOS, JMAR, JAR, and BRIA. Excluding JAL (which focuses on publishing review articles), CAR, JAR, and RAS are the least balanced in terms of publishing a variety of research methods, as analytical methods have a higher than 50% share of all the management accounting articles HMAR/1.1/14 they publish. JAE also has a relatively focused method coverage, since about 90% of all the management accounting articles it publishes are either analytical or archival. While AOS, BRIA, JMAR, MAR, and TAR have different method foci, they generally cover a broad range of methods and show at least four methods with a higher than 10% representation among the management accounting articles they publish. Table 3, Panel C, shows that sociology as a source discipline is dominant in AOS and MAR, whereas economics is dominant in the other journals. While AOS, BRIA, JMAR, MAR, and TAR have different disciplinary foci, they nonetheless have a relatively broad coverage of source disciplines. CAR, JAE, JAR, and RAS, on the other hand, appear to focus on economics-based research, which represents upwards of 70% of the management accounting articles they publish. As Table 5 below reveals, this also appears to be related to research method. 2.4. Article Characteristics Table 4 cross-tabulates topics with research methods. Panel A shows that most cost articles are analytical, followed by frameworks and archival research methods. Among the control articles, frameworks, surveys, analytical methods, and experiments are the most common methods. Panel B shows that about 80% of the surveys, experiments, and field-based methods are used to examine control topics. Analytical and archival methods are more balanced in terms of their employment for both cost and control topics. [INSERT TABLE 4] Table 5 cross-tabulates research methods with source disciplines. Panel A shows that the analytical method dominates economics-based research (45%), by far, followed by the archival method as a distant second (17%). Frameworks, survey, field, and case methods dominate sociology-based research (92% combined). Experiments dominate psychology-based management HMAR/1.1/15 accounting research (53%), followed by the survey method (29%). Cross-tabulating in the other direction, Panel B shows that nearly all analytical research (96%) and the vast majority of archival research (80%) has an economics-based impetus, whereas about 70% of the articles that use case or field methods do so to address sociology-based research questions. [INSERT TABLE 5] Finally, Table 6 cross-tabulates source disciplines with topics. Panel A suggests that cost is dominated by economic thought, whereas control, which draws mostly on sociology, also draws on economics and psychology. In the other direction, Panel B shows that more than, or nearly, 80% of the articles that are psychology or sociology-based deal with control topics. Articles that have an economics-based orientation, however, also appear to be applied more frequently to address cost accounting topics. It is less probable though to see psychology and sociology-based theories applied to cost accounting topics (about 10%). [INSERT TABLE 6] 2.5. Authoring Characteristics Table 7 examines the authoring characteristics of our sample management accounting articles. Panel A shows that 605 of the 898 authors (67%) in our sample published one article only. Panel B shows that authors with more than one article tend to publish in multiple journals, thus, indicating that there is no particular journal concentration. Panels C and D show a similar pattern with respect to topics and methods; that is, authors with more than one article tend to address different topics employing different methods. Panel E, however, indicates that authors with more than one article tend to be bound more by discipline, consistent with the observations in Merchant, Van der Stede, and Zheng (2003). Finally, Panel F shows that most articles are single- HMAR/1.1/16 authored (42%) or coauthored by two or three people (39% and 16%, respectively). Coauthored articles by more than three people are rare. [INSERT TABLE 7] 3. Analyzing the Community In this section, we use citation analyses and several social network measures to analyze the links between articles in management accounting research and, hence, between the topics, methods, and source disciplines these articles encompass, as well as between the scholars whose outputs are these journal articles. 3.1. Citation Analysis Beginning in the mid-1980s, Brown and colleagues published a number of citation-based studies looking at the relative contributions of individuals, as well as the institutions where they are trained and employed, in accounting (e.g., Brown & Gardener, 1985a, 1985b; Brown, Gardner, & Vasarhelyi, 1987). These studies typically rely on the Social Science Citation Index (SSCI) to count citations from articles in a limited number of indexed journals across a variety of literatures. Given our focus on the field of management accounting, we count citations within our database, including citations from articles in BRIA, CAR, JMAR, MAR, and RAS, which SSCI does not index.㸳 Thus, although our citation approach does not extend into other literatures, it provides better coverage of the management accounting literature than prior work (e.g., Mensah, Hwang, & Wu, 2004). With 38,863 total citations in our sample of 916 articles, a manual count of citations is not feasible. Accordingly, we develop computer programs to analyze citations to articles, and their authors, within our database.㸴 Merged with the descriptive data reported above, this enables us HMAR/1.1/17 to examine the links between, and influence of, individuals, articles, topics, research methods, and source disciplines. Table 8 examines the pattern of citations based on topics, methods, and source disciplines. Panel A takes each article’s topic classification and counts the citations for each of these articles to other articles also using their topic classification. Panel A shows that the control literature draws heavily on its own stream of research, with 84% of the citations going to other controlfocused articles. Cost draws more than half of its citations from the cost literature (56%), but also draws heavily (39%) on the control literature. Articles classified as “other” also draw most of their work from the control literature (56%). [INSERT TABLE 8] Panel B examines research methods, showing that most articles draw on other streams of literature, except analytical articles with 78% of their citations to other analytical articles. Thinking of research as benefiting from multiple methods, it seems reasonable to expect that archival, experimental, survey, and other research could benefit from drawing on analytical models to derive testable hypotheses. However, the data do not support this expectation, showing that archival articles cite analytical studies only 14% of the time, and experimental and survey articles cite analytical work even less. Although these percentages appear low, they are large in comparison to the extent that analytical articles cite archival, experimental, and survey articles (6%, 1%, and 3%, respectively). Does this suggest that empirical work finds support for the analytical models, such that analytical models need no revision? Or does it suggest that these methods do not crossfertilize? Framework articles, however, appear to have a relatively broad impact on studies using other methods, particularly case, field, and other framework articles, but also archival and survey studies. The data also reveal a tendency of experimental and survey research drawing on studies HMAR/1.1/18 using like methods, in the order of 41% and 50% respectively, but these levels of method-based self-citations are much lower than is the case for analytical research (78%). Moreover, the tendency to draw on studies that use like methods is to be expected as studies cite prior work for various research design choices, such as regarding survey scales developed in prior studies. Examining source disciplines in Panel C, the economics-based literature draws heavily on itself (76%), with few citations to psychology (6%) and sociology (12%). Articles based on psychology draw quite evenly from economics, psychology, and sociology. Sociology, like economics, tends to draw heavily on its own (65%). Also noteworthy is that sociology draws to a greater extent on economics (16%) than on psychology (8%). Except for psychology, it appears that the paradigms are fairly focused, drawing relatively sparsely on the insights from other disciplines (Merchant, Van der Stede, & Zheng, 2003). We now turn to using citation-based measures to describe networks of management accounting scholars; that is, networks of individuals whose outputs are these journal articles (among other outputs). As a preface to the network analyses, we note that our data in Table 3 above suggests a difference between AOS and MAR and the other eight journals in terms of management accounting methods and source disciplines.㸵 A closer investigation of authoring characteristics and citation patterns suggest that both groups of journals represent distinct networks of management accounting researchers. First, of the 293 authors in our database with at least two articles (Table 7, Panel A), only 101 (34%) published in both groups of journals. In other words, the majority of scholars with at least two articles publish in either, but not both, groups of journals.㸶 Second, the citation patterns in Table 9 suggest that authors publishing in either group of journals tend to cite articles within the same group of journals more than articles in the other group. [INSERT TABLE 9] HMAR/1.1/19 Selto and Widener (2005) also find evidence of journal specialization by topic, theory, method, and data sources, particularly between AOS and MAR on the one hand, and journals edited in North America on the other hand. Brown, Gardner, and Vasarhelyi (1987) find that articles in AOS focus on different topics, use different methods, and draw on different source disciplines compared to articles in JAR and TAR. Lukka and Kasanen (1996) focus on geography (U.S. vs. non-U.S.) and find that journals edited in the U.S. (JAE, JAR, and TAR) and outside the U.S. (Abacus, Accounting and Business Research, and AOS) employ different research methods. Specifically, 80% of the articles in U.S.-edited journals use statistical analyses, whereas many articles published in non-U.S.-edited journals employ case and other research methods (only 43% use statistical analyses). Finally, Bricker (1988, p. 130) notes that “journals such as Abacus and Accounting, Organizations and Society, both published outside the United States, appear to favour historical studies and articles that rely on early generations of accounting and nonaccounting literature.” Thus, findings in the prior literature as well as empirical observations in the earlier sections of this chapter suggest that our subsequent analyses would be incomplete without considering the authors publishing in AOS and MAR and those publishing in the other eight journals as separate subnetworks. 3.2. Social Network Analysis In this section, we extend our analysis to create a citation matrix. The citation matrix is a proxy for communication among authors.㸷 Specifically, we create an 898-by-898 matrix of authors where each cell represents the number of citations by one author to another author. Rows (columns) indicate citing (cited) authors, with self-citations on the diagonal. Thus, cell values provide a measure of the strength of association between two individuals. The citation matrix is HMAR/1.1/20 non-symmetric since, for example, Smith may cite Jones whereas Jones does not cite Smith. We use transformed matrices to compute several social network measures: centrality, size, density, and inclusiveness (Monge & Contractor, 2003).㸯㸮 We reiterate that citations in this matrix represent citations within our database.㸯㸯 3.2.1. Network Centrality Centrality is the degree to which an individual has a predominant influence in a given network. We measure centrality by degree, or the number of direct links an individual has with others in the network. Degree consists of both indegree (the number of direct links to an individual) and outdegree (the number of direct links from an individual). To measure centrality, we dichotomize the citation matrix, where 0 indicates no citations between two individuals, and 1 indicates one or more citations. This codification thus shows that there is a relationship between two authors; it does not indicate the strength of the relationship. Indegree for a particular author, then, is the number of individuals in the network who cite the author, and thus, is a measure of influence of the cited author.㸯㸰 Table 10 shows the centrality of the three networks that we consider, listing the 25 authors with the highest indegree in each network in descending order. Consistent with our earlier observations, we find that only four of the 25 authors in the overall network are also on both the lists of 25 authors for the two subnetworks (i.e., P. Brownell, K. A. Merchant, M. D. Shields, and S. M. Young). [INSERT TABLE 10] Outdegree is the extent to which an individual has cited others in the network, and thus, is a measure of the degree to which one builds on the work of others in the network. For example, R. S. Kaplan has been cited by 179 of the 898 authors of management accounting (20%),㸯㸱 whereas he has cited only 32 authors in the overall network. Comparing indegree and outdegree, one can HMAR/1.1/21 assess the symmetry of an author’s influence. As a word of caution, however, a low outdegree might also result from several high-influence articles early in our sample period (such as R. S. Kaplan’s 1984 article in TAR). Aside from this possibility, a high indegree can be interpreted as proxy of an author’s “prestige” in the network. Wasserman and Faust (1994) define a prestigious actor (i.e., author) as “one who is the object of extensive ties […] focusing solely on the actor as a recipient” (p. 174). In our context, such ties are citations between authors with the focus being on citations received from other authors; thus, indegree. 3.2.2. Other Network Characteristics Table 11 reports measures of network size, density, and inclusiveness by journal for the overall network and both subnetworks. [INSERT TABLE 11] Network size is the number of authors in a given network, which can be created for journals, but also for topics or across time (e.g., two separate networks for each decade of our 20-year period). Network size in our study ranges from 32 (RAS) to 898 authors (overall). Network density is the number of directional links between authors [k] divided by the number of possible links [n(n-1)], or k/[n(n-1)], where n is the number of authors, or network size (Scott, 2000). The higher the network density, the greater the number of connections among authors (Kilduff & Tsai, 2003). Table 11 shows that the highest density is for JAR, followed by AOS and JAE. The lowest densities are for CAR and BRIA. The subnetwork of eight journals that are edited in North America has a higher density than the subnetwork around AOS and MAR. Compared to these two subnetworks, the overall network has a lower density, suggesting relatively few links across the two subnetworks. This provides additional evidence of two somewhat distinct research communities. HMAR/1.1/22 Network inclusiveness is the number of authors in a network [n] minus the number of isolated authors [i] divided by n, or (n-i)/n. Isolated authors have no citations from other authors and do not cite others in the network (Monge & Contractor, 2003). Inclusiveness is different from density because a network can have very few connections (low density), yet have high inclusiveness (i.e., few, or no, isolated authors).㸯㸲 Table 11 shows that AOS has a higher inclusiveness than the other journals, with the second highest being for MAR and TAR. BRIA and CAR have the lowest inclusiveness. Journal networks that are dense and highly inclusive have extensive communication patterns among their contributing authors. This appears to be the case for AOS, JAE, JAR, and TAR, although JAE has relatively low inclusiveness and TAR has relatively low density. JAE’s high density is not surprising given its focus on economics-based research (Table 3, Panel C), yet there are quite a few isolated authors publishing in JAE. The low density for TAR, we conjecture, probably reflects both research diversity and frequent editor changes that are typical of premier association-based journals. BRIA and CAR have low density and inclusiveness, suggesting that authors publishing in these journals are not primarily citing authors within these journals. Low density and isolated authors are more likely for young journals, not only because of their short history (and hence, less citations), but also because new journals’ “identities” (“research tastes”) and/or reputations take time to establish. RAS, which is the youngest journal in our sample, however, has low inclusiveness yet medium density. This suggests that, while there are quite a few isolated authors publishing in RAS, the non-isolated authors are quite well connected to one another. Given that the vast majority of articles in RAS are analytical (Table 3, Panel B), its high density is likely due to a well-connected group of analytical researchers. MAR has relatively low density despite high inclusiveness. This suggests that MAR has few isolated authors among its HMAR/1.1/23 diverse group of contributing authors. JMAR and JAL both have medium density and inclusiveness. 3.2.3. Directed Graphs To visualize communication, we create a diagram where authors are represented as points (nodes) and communication among them as directed lines (Batagelj & Mrvar, 2002; Borgatti, 2002; Borgatti, Everett, & Freeman, 1999). An arrow pointing to an author means that the author has been cited by the individual at the origin of the line. Individuals with a large number of lines terminating at their node can be seen as influential. Individuals with many lines originating from their node can be seen as pulling together ideas from the literature. A line with arrows at both ends means that the individuals have cited one another. [INSERT FIGURE 1] Figure 1, Panel A, depicts a network for the entire dataset. To highlight major communications, we only draw the authors and links with eight or more citations among authors.㸯㸳 Of the 43 individuals shown, the diagram suggests that the central authors are S. Baiman (analytical), C. W. Chow (experimental), M. D. Shields (experimental), W. S. Waller (experimental), K. A. Merchant (field), and P. Brownell (survey), with at least three arrows pointing to their nodes. Authors with many arrows leaving from their node, on the other hand, tend to integrate the literature. These authors are C. W. Chow, M. D. Shields, S. M. Young, and M. A. Covaleski. These authors tend to have addressed multiple topics using multiple methods and/or source disciplines across their various studies.㸯㸴 Figure 1, Panel B, shows the diagram for the subnetwork consisting of authors publishing in AOS and MAR. The diagram consists of authors who have at least four citations to or from an author in the network, revealing a network of 47 individuals. Striking here is the existence of two HMAR/1.1/24 fairly dense networks completely separated from each another. The first subnetwork, comprised of 28 individuals, has A. S. Dunk, G. L. Harrison, K. A. Merchant, M. D. Shields, Y. Kato, C. W. Chow, J. G. Birnberg, and V. Govindarajan as central authors (with at least three arrows arriving at their nodes). This network largely represents a stream of research centered on management control. M. A. Abernethy, M. D. Shields, J. L. McKinnon, C. W. Chow, and A. Wu all have more than four arrows leaving their nodes. The second subnetwork, smaller and less dense (19 authors), has D. J. Cooper, M. A. Covaleski, and J. Roberts as central authors, with at least three arrows pointing to their nodes. This network primarily represents sociology-based management accounting research. Turning to the network around the eight journals edited in North America, the diagram in Panel C consists of authors who have at least five citations to or from an author in the network. The 40 individuals shown in Panel C suggests three subnetworks. The first cluster consists of nine individuals developing analytical models on a variety of topics. Central authors in this cluster are S. Baiman and S. Reichelstein. The second cluster of six authors primarily represents cost accounting research. This cluster includes authors like R. D. Banker and M. Gupta who have done both analytical and empirical research in this area. This cluster, however, appears to be distinct from the analytical research community in the first cluster. The third cluster primarily consists of authors researching control topics, mostly using experimental and survey methods. This cluster consists of 25 authors, with C. W. Chow, W. S. Waller, and P. Brownell as the central authors. In this subnetwork, S. M. Young and M. D. Shields integrate the cluster with six or more arrows leaving their nodes. Most striking in this diagram is the virtual absence of links across the three subnetworks. In fact, the only citations between the subnetworks are from six authors in the control subnetwork to one author, S. Baiman, in the analytical subnetwork. This is HMAR/1.1/25 surprising since multiple methods enhance our understanding of empirical phenomena. We would expect analytical research to develop testable propositions for empirical research that subsequently updates models as empirical results are obtained. Such does not appear to be the case in the field of managerial accounting, however. 4. Summary and Commentary In this study, we analyzed 916 management accounting articles classified by topic, method, and source discipline, as well as their citation data, in 10 journals from 1981 through 2000. The first part of our study tabulated and cross-tabulated various characteristics of these articles over time. This analysis revealed a shift over time from budgeting and organizational control to performance measurement and evaluation topics. We also observed a decline in the use of experiments over time, and an increase in archival, case, and field research methods. In terms of source disciplines, the majority of management accounting research remained rooted in economics. Moreover, our analysis suggested that two journals in our sample, AOS and MAR, have a greater tendency to publish case, field, and survey studies that draw on sociology. This stands in contrast to the other eight journals, all edited in North America, which tend to publish more analytical, archival, and experimental studies that draw on economics. As a matter of fact, about half of the management accounting articles appeared in AOS and MAR. The second part of this chapter used citation and social network analyses to examine whether the community of management accounting scholars consists of several subnetworks, with lines drawn between them based on topic, method, or source discipline. We found that control topics, analytical research, as well as economics-based articles draw heavily on their own. Moreover, social network analyses suggested the existence of two quite distinct networks in management HMAR/1.1/26 accounting research, one centered on AOS and MAR, and the other on the eight sample journals edited in North America. We resist the temptation to speculate about the sources of these differences between the two subnetworks. There are, however, several plausible conjectures. First, our empirical observations in this chapter are consistent with Atkinson et al. (1997, p. 80), who state that “North-American contributors hold a primarily economics-based worldview, especially as it pertains to research topics and methods. Conversely, Australian and European authors lean more toward the sociological aspects of management accounting and its role in organizations.” To the extent that AOS and MAR are less North-American centric (e.g., as reflected in their editorial board membership and authorship composition) than the other eight journals,㸯㸵 the different worldviews as described by Atkinson et al. (1997) indeed reflect our observation that articles in AOS and MAR rely to a greater (lesser) extent on sociology (economics) as a source discipline compared to the other eight journals edited in North America. Further, the differences we observe in the reliance on source disciplines and the use of research methods between the two journal subnetworks also might be a reflection of differences in doctoral training in North-America compared to the rest of the world, as some have alluded (e.g., Scapens, 2004; Shields, 1997). For instance, North-American doctoral programs in accounting tend to follow a disciplinary base primarily rooted in economics. In addition, North Americans tend to receive a great deal of training in quantitative methods with little or no training in field or case study methods. Doctoral programs outside of North America, on the other hand, do not tend to have a similar disciplinary or method focus. Going beyond such rather broad inferences, however, we find that the two journal subnetworks are also different in their reliance on, and citations of, specific theoretical works. If AOS HMAR/1.1/27 and MAR are more open to the viewpoint that management accounting is a “social practice” (Baxter & Chua, 2003; Hopwood, 1978a, 1978b, 1979, 1983) rather than an exclusively “economic activity,” as several have claimed is the predominant view in the North-American journals (e.g., Scapens, 2004), then we should observe differences in citations to social theories and theorists, such as Foucault, Habermas, Giddens, and more recently Latour, between the two journal subnetworks. The data in Table 12 support this conjecture. Table 12 shows that the proportion of articles that cite these four theorists (Foucault, Habermas, Giddens, Latour) is 7% in MAR and 15% in AOS, whereas the proportions in the other eight journals edited in North America range from 0% (CAR, JAE, JAR, and RAS) to 2% (TAR), 4% (JAL), 5% (JMAR), and 6% (BRIA). We believe this provides evidence that the two journal networks that we identified in this study indeed are different in the worldviews on management accounting they are open to. [INSERT TABLE 12] But we also found distinct clusters of management accounting scholars within each journal subnetwork that appear to be based on topic, method, or source discipline with relatively little communication across them. This is consistent with prior observations, and debates, of crossdisciplinary boundaries within our field (Hopwood, 2002; Luft & Shields, 2002; Lukka & Mouritsen, 2002; Merchant, Van der Stede, & Zheng, 2003; Shields, 1997; Zimmerman, 2001). We have noted several limitations of our analyses throughout this chapter. First, several other cuts of the data are possible beyond those presented here. For example, one could examine partitions of, or networks around, long-established (e.g., JAR) vs. young (e.g., RAS) journals, general (e.g., TAR) vs. specialty (e.g., JMAR) journals, or economics (e.g., JAE) vs. behavioral (e.g., BRIA) journals. In addition to our primary focus on charting the field, one could also use these data for a more theorized analysis of networks (e.g., Burt, 1980; Watts, 1999) and how they HMAR/1.1/28 evolve over time. But perhaps the most important limitation is that citations are used as a proxy for communication links among authors. Other mechanisms exist for disseminating ideas among the research community. These include working papers, workshops, conference presentations, books, practitioner-oriented publications, and personal communication. We suspect, however, that the same disciplinary boundaries that we detected on the basis of citations also exist for these other forms of communications. This perhaps explains why, after all, relatively few major advances are being made in our field even when considering relatively long time periods. Acknowledgements We appreciate the many helpful comments from Judi McLean Parks, Ken Merchant, Bob Scapens, and Ray Sparrowe, as well as from participants at the Oxford 2005 Handbook of Management Accounting Research Conference. References Atkinson, A., Balakrishnan, R., Booth, P., Cote, J., Groot, T., Malmi, T., Roberts, H., Uliana, E., & Wu, A. (1997). New directions in management accounting research. Journal of Management Accounting Research, 9, 79-108. Baiman. S. (1982). Agency research in managerial accounting: a survey. Journal of Accounting Literature, 1, 154-213. Baiman, S. (1990) Agency Research in managerial accounting: a second look. Accounting Organizations and Society, 15(4), 341-371. Batagelj, V., & Mrvar, A. (2002). Pajek 0.85 for Windows. University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. Baxter, J., & Chua, W. F. (2003). Alternative management accounting research: whence and whither. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 28(2/3), 97-126. Birnberg, J. G., Shields, M. D., & Young, S. M. (1990). The case for multiple methods in empirical management accounting research (with an illustration from budget setting). Journal of Management Accounting Research, 2, 33-66. HMAR/1.1/29 Borgatti, S. P. (2002). NetDraw. Harvard, MA: Analytic Technologies. Borgatti, S. P., Everett M. G., & Freeman, L. C. (1999). UCINET 6.0 Version 1.00. Natick, MA: Analytic Technologies. Bricker, R. J. (1988). Knowledge preservation in accounting: a citational study. Abacus, 24(2), 120-131. Bromwich, M. 1990. The case for strategic management accounting: the role of accounting information for strategy in competitive markets. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 15(1), 27-46. Brown, L. D. (2005). The importance of circulating and presenting manuscripts: evidence from the accounting literature. The Accounting Review, 80(1), 55-83. Brown, L. D, & Gardner, J. C. (1985a). Applying citation analysis to evaluate the research contributions of accounting faculty and doctoral programs. The Accounting Review, 60(2), 262- 277. Brown, L. D., & Gardner, J. C. (1985b). Using citation analysis to assess the impact of journals and articles on contemporary accounting research (CAR). Journal of Accounting Research, 23(1), 84-109. Brown, L. D., & Huefner, R. J. (1994). The familiarity with and perceived quality of accounting journals: views of senior accounting faculty in leading U.S. MBA programs. Contemporary Accounting Research, 11(1), 223-250. Brown, L. D., Gardner, J. C., & Vasarhelyi, M. A. (1987). An analysis of the research contributions of Accounting, Organizations and Society, 1976-1984. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 12(2), 193-204. Brown, L. D., & Laksmana, I. (2004). Ranking accounting Ph.D. programs and faculties using social science research network downloads. Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting, 22, 249-266. Brownell, P., & Merchant, K. A. (1990). The budgetary and performance influences of product standardization and manufacturing process automation. Journal of Accounting Research, 28(2), 388-397. Burt, R. S. (1980). Models of network structure. Annual Review of Sociology, 6, 79-141. HMAR/1.1/30 Cooper, D. J. (1983). Tidiness, muddle, and things: commonalities and divergencies in two approaches to management accounting research. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 8(2/3), 269-286. Cooper, R. (1987). Does your company need a new cost system? Journal of Cost Management, 1(1), 45-49. Covaleski, M. A., Dirsmith, M. W., & Samuel, S. (1996). Managerial accounting research: the contributions of organizational and sociological theories. Journal of Management Accounting Research, 8, 1-35. Dent, J. F. (1990). Strategy, organization, and control: some possibilities for accounting research. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 15(1/2), 3-25. Hiromoto, T. (1988). Another hidden edge: Japanese management accounting. Harvard Business Review, 66(4), 22-25. Hopwood, A. G. (1978a). Towards an organizational perspective for the study of accounting and information systems. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 3(1), 3-13. Hopwood, A. G. (1978b). Accounting research and the world of action. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 3(2), 93-95. Hopwood, A. G. (1979). Editorial. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 4(3), 145-147. Hopwood, A. G. (1983). On trying to study accounting in the contexts in which it operates. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 8(2/3), 287-305. Hopwood, A. G. (2002). If only there were simple solutions, but there aren’t: some reflections on Zimmerman’s critique of empirical management accounting research. The European Accounting Review, 11(4), 777-786. Johnson, H. T., & Kaplan, R. S. (1987). Relevance Lost: The Rise and Fall of Management Accounting. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Kaplan, R. S. (1983). Measuring manufacturing performance: a new challenge for management accounting research. The Accounting Review, 58(4), 686-705. Kaplan, R. S. (1984). The evolution of management accounting. The Accounting Review, 59(3), 390-418. Kaplan, R. S. (1986). The role for empirical research in management accounting. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 11(4/5), 429-452. HMAR/1.1/31 Kaplan, R. S. (1993). Research opportunities in management accounting. Journal of Management Accounting Research, 5, 1-14. Kaplan, R. S., & Norton, D. P. (1992). The balanced scorecard: measures that drive performance. Harvard Business Review, 70(1), 71-79. Kilduff, M., & Tsai, W. (2003). Social Networks and Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc. Lowe, A., & Locke, J. (2005). Perceptions of journal quality and research paradigm: results of a web-based survey of British accounting academics. Accounting Organizations and Society, 30(1), 81-98. Luft, J., & Shields, M. D. (2002). Zimmerman’s contentious conjectures: describing the present and prescribing the future of empirical management accounting research. The European Accounting Review, 11(4), 795-804. Lukka, K., & Kasanen, E. (1996). Is accounting a global or local discipline? Evidence from major research journals. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 21(7/8), 755-773. Lukka, K., & Mouritsen, J. (2002). Homogeneity or heterogeneity of research in management accounting. The European Accounting Review, 11(4), 805-812. Macintosh, N. B., & Scapens, R. W. (1990). Structuration theory in management accounting. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 15(5), 455-477. McRae, T. W. (1974). A citational analysis of the accounting information network. Journal of Accounting Research, 12(1), 80-92. Mensah, Y. M., Hwang, N. R., & Wu, D. (2004). Does managerial accounting research contribute to related disciplines? An examination using citation analysis. Journal of Management Accounting Research, 16, 163-181. Merchant, K. A., Van der Stede, W. A., & Zheng, L. (2003). Disciplinary constraints on the advancement of knowledge: the case of organizational incentive systems. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 28(2/3), 251-286. Monge, P. R., & Contractor, N. S. (2003). Theories of Communications Networks. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Scapens, R. W. (2004). Innovations in management accounting practices and research in the United Kingdom. Keynote address at the 4th New Directions in Management Accounting: Innovations in Practice and Research conference, EIASM, Brussels, December 9-11, 2004. HMAR/1.1/32 Scott, J. (2000). Social Network Analysis: A Handbook (2nd Ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc. Selto, F. H., & Widener, S. K. (2005). New directions in management accounting research: insights from practice. Advances in Management Accounting, in press. Shank, J. (1989). Strategic cost management: new wines or just new bottles? Journal of Management Accounting Research, 1, 47-65. Shank, J., & Govindarajan, V. (1993). Strategic Cost Management: The New Tool for Competitive Advantage. New York, NY: The Free Press. Shields, M. D. (1997). Research in management accounting by North Americans in the 1990s. Journal of Management Accounting Research, 9, 3-61. Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Watts, D. J. (1999). Networks, dynamics, and the small-world phenomenon. The American Journal of Sociology, 105(2), 493-527. Young, S. M., & Selto, F. H. (1991). New manufacturing practices and cost management: a review of the literature and directions for future research. Journal of Accounting Literature, 10, 265-298. Zimmerman, J. L. (2001). Conjectures regarding empirical managerial accounting research. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 32(1/3), 411-427. HMAR/1.1/33 TABLE 1 Sample Statistics Panel A: Management Accounting “Market Share” 1981- 2000 1981- 19901 1991- 20001 Articles2 (Pct.3 ) Articles2 (Pct.3 ) Articles2 (Pct.3 ) Accounting Organizations and Society (AOS) 254 (39.9) 132 (42.4) 122 (37.5) Behavioral Research in Accounting (BRIA) 35 (23.5) 6 (37.5) 29 (21.8) Contemporary Accounting Research (CAR) 45 (12.1) 22 (15.6) 23 (10.0) Journal of Accounting & Economics (JAE) 38 (10.4) 4 (2.9) 34 (15.1) Journal of Accounting Literature (JAL) 28 (21.1) 18 (22.5) 10 (18.9) Journal of Accounting Research (JAR) 70 (13.7) 43 (14.4) 27 (12.7) Journal of Management Accounting Research (JMAR) 117 (100.0) 21 (100.0) 96 (100.0) Management Accounting Research (MAR) 197 (100.0) 14 (100.0) 183 (100.0) Review of Accounting Studies (RAS) 21 (33.3) -- 21 (33.3) The Accounting Review (TAR) 111 (16.2) 60 (16.9) 51 (15.4) Total 916 (28.4) 320 (23.3) 596 (32.2) Panel B: “Journal Share” of Management Accounting Articles2 (Pct.4 ) Articles2 (Pct.4 ) Articles2 (Pct.4 ) Accounting Organizations and Society (AOS) 254 (27.8) 132 (41.2) 122 (20.5) Behavioral Research in Accounting (BRIA) 35 (3.8) 6 (1.9) 29 (4.9) Contemporary Accounting Research (CAR) 45 (4.9) 22 (6.9) 23 (3.9) Journal of Accounting & Economics (JAE) 38 (4.1) 4 (1.2) 34 (5.7) Journal of Accounting Literature (JAL) 28 (3.0) 18 (5.6) 10 (1.7) Journal of Accounting Research (JAR) 70 (7.6) 43 (13.4) 27 (4.5) Journal of Management Accounting Research (JMAR) 117 (12.8) 21 (6.6) 96 (16.1) Management Accounting Research (MAR) 197 (21.5) 14 (4.4) 183 (30.7) Review of Accounting Studies (RAS) 21 (2.3) -- 21 (3.5) The Accounting Review (TAR) 111 (12.1) 60 (18.8) 51 (8.6) Total 916 (100.0) 320 (100.0) 596 (100.0) 1 AOS, JAE, JAR, and TAR were established prior to the beginning of our study period (1981). All the other journals do not cover our entire study period, with the first volume of BRIA starting in 1989, CAR in 1984, JAL in 1982, JMAR in 1989, MAR in 1990, and RAS in 1996. 2 Number of management accounting articles in each journal in each period. 3 Percentage management accounting articles out of the total number of articles in each journal in each period. 4 Number of management accounting articles in each journal as a percentage of the total number of management accounting articles in each period (column percentages). HMAR/1.1/34 TABLE 2 Article Classifications Panel A: Management Accounting Research Topics Research Topic1 1981- 2000 1981- 1990 1991- 2000 Cost Articles (Pct.2 ) Articles (Pct.2 ) Articles (Pct.2 ) Cost Allocation 140 (15.3) 36 (11.3) 104 (17.5) Other Cost Accounting Topics 21 (2.3) 14 (4.4) 7 (1.2) Cost Practices 15 (1.6) 4 (1.3) 11 (1.9) Multiple 1 (0.1) 0 (0.0) 1 (0.2) All Cost 177 (19.3) 54 (16.9) 123 (20.6) Control Budgeting 134 (14.6) 64 (20.0) 70 (11.7) Capital Budgeting 47 (5.1) 14 (4.4) 33 (5.5) Performance Measurement and Evaluation 148 (16.2) 35 (10.9) 113 (19.0) Organizational Control 296 (32.3) 119 (37.2) 177 (29.7) International Control 16 (1.8) 4 (1.3) 12 (2.0) Multiple 3 (0.3) 1 (0.3) 2 (0.3) All Control 644 (70.3) 237 (74.1) 407 (68.3) Other AIS 7 (0.8) 4 (1.3) 3 (0.5) Benchmarking 2 (0.2) 0 (0.0) 2 (0.3) Quality (TQM) 9 (1.0) 0 (0.0) 9 (1.5) Just-in-Time (JIT) 7 (0.8) 0 (0.0) 7 (1.8) Research Methods 20 (2.2) 6 (1.9) 14 (2.4) Strategic Management 15 (1.6) 7 (2.2) 8 (1.3) Transfer Pricing 31 (3.4) 9 (2.8) 22 (3.7) Multiple 4 (0.1) 3 (0.9) 1 (0.2) All Other 95 (10.4) 29 (9.1) 66 (11.1) Total 916 (100.0) 320 (100.0) 596 (100.0) 1 We classify each article into one of 15 categories. In later analyses, we reduce these to the basic splits of COST, CONTROL, and OTHER. Eight articles include a combination of topics, which we list as “Multiple” under the category (COST, CONTROL, or OTHER) where the article has its main topic emphasis. 2 Number of management accounting articles by research topic as a percentage of the total number of management accounting articles in each period (column percentages). HMAR/1.1/35 TABLE 2 (cont.) Panel B: Management Accounting Research Methods 1981- 2000 1981- 1990 1991- 2000 Research Method3 Articles (Pct.4 ) Articles (Pct.4 ) Articles (Pct.4 ) Analytical 169 (18.4) 62 (19.4) 107 (18.0) Archival 78 (8.5) 10 (3.1) 68 (11.4) Case 78 (8.5) 16 (5.0) 62 (10.4) Experiment 116 (12.7) 50 (15.6) 66 (11.1) Field 91 (9.9) 23 (7.2) 68 (11.4) Frameworks 179 (19.5) 77 (24.1) 102 (17.1) Review 49 (5.3) 24 (7.5) 25 (4.2) Survey 149 (16.3) 55 (17.2) 94 (15.8) Other 7 (0.7) 3 (0.9) 4 (0.6) Total 916 (100.0) 320 (100.0) 596 (100.0) 3 We classify each article into one of eight research methods. Four articles, however, employ multimethod approaches, which we report as OTHER here and in the later analyses. Only three articles in our sample use the simulation method, which we also group in the OTHER category because of the low frequency. 4 Number of management accounting articles by research method as a percentage of the total number of management accounting articles in each period (column percentages). HMAR/1.1/36 TABLE 2 (cont.) Panel C: Management Accounting Source Disciplines Source Discipline5 1981- 2000 1981- 1990 1991- 2000 Economics Articles (Pct.6 ) Articles (Pct.6 ) Articles (Pct.6 ) Economics 360 (39.3) 122 (38.1) 238 (39.9) Economics/Psychology 13 (1.4) 4 (1.3) 9 (1.5) Economics/Sociology 20 (2.2) 5 (1.6) 15 (2.5) Economics/POM 3 (0.3) 2 (0.6) 1 (0.2) All Economics 396 (43.2) 133 (41.6) 263 (44.1) Psychology Psychology 121 (13.2) 58 (18.1) 63 (10.6) Psychology/Economics 4 (0.4) 0 (0.0) 4 (0.7) Psychology/Sociology 15 (1.6) 3 (0.9) 12 (2.0) All Psychology 140 (15.3) 61 (19.1) 79 (13.3) Sociology Sociology 320 (34.9) 101 (31.6) 219 (36.7) Sociology/Economics 19 (2.1) 9 (2.8) 10 (1.7) Sociology/Psychology 23 (2.5) 10 (3.1) 13 (2.2) All Sociology 362 (39.5) 120 (37.5) 242 (40.6) Other History 4 (0.4) 1 (0.3) 3 (0.5) POM 12 (1.3) 5 (1.6) 7 (1.2) POM/Economics 2 (0.2) 0 (0.0) 2 (0.3) All Other 18 (2.0) 6 (1.9) 12 (2.0) Total 916 (100.0) 320 (100.0) 596 (100.0) 5 Articles in the database draw from five source disciplines: economics, psychology, sociology, production and operations management (POM), and history. Some articles draw from multiple source disciplines, as shown. In later analyses, we reduce the listed categories to the basic splits on ECONOMICS, PSYCHOLOGY, SOCIOLOGY, OTHER (History and POM), and MULTIPLE. 6 Number of management accounting articles by source discipline as a percentage of the total number of management accounting articles in each period (column percentages). HMAR/1.1/37 TABLE 3 Journal Characteristics Panel A: Management Accounting Research Topics by Journal Cost Control Other Total AOS 131 (5.1)2 217 (85.4) 24 (9.4) 254 (100.0) BRIA 0 (0.0) 27 (77.1) 8 (22.9) 35 (100.0) CAR 11 (24.4) 30 (66.7) 4 (8.9) 45 (100.0) JAE 5 (13.2) 30 (78.9) 3 (7.9) 38 (100.0) JAL 6 (21.4) 18 (64.3) 4 (14.3) 28 (100.0) JAR 17 (24.3) 48 (68.6) 5 (7.1) 70 (100.0) JMAR 36 (30.8) 61 (52.1) 20 (17.1) 117 (100.0) MAR 49 (24.9) 130 (66.0) 18 (9.1) 197 (100.0) RAS 5 (23.8) 11 (52.4) 5 (23.8) 21 (100.0) TAR 35 (31.5) 72 (64.9) 4 (3.6) 111 (100.0) AOS and MAR 62 (13.7) 347 (76.9) 42 (9.3) 451 (100.0) Other 8 Journals 115 (24.7) 297 (63.9) 53 (11.4) 465 (100.0) Total 177 (19.3) 644 (70.3) 95 (10.4) 916 (100.0) 1 Number of articles. 2 Row percentages, thus indicating the coverage of topics by journal. HMAR/1.1/38 TABLE 3 (cont.) Panel B: Management Accounting Research Methods by Journal Analytical Archival Case Experiment Field Framework Review Survey Other Total AOS 0 (0.0)4 6 (2.4) 18 (7.1) 26 (10.2) 46 (18.1) 82 (32.3) 7 (2.8) 67 (26.4) 2 (0.8) 254 (100.0) BRIA 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 1 (2.9) 13 (37.1) 0 (0.0) 10 (28.6) 5 (14.3) 6 (17.1) 0 (0.0) 35 (100.0) CAR 29 (64.4) 3 (6.7) 0 (0.0) 7 (15.6) 1 (2.2) 0 (0.0) 1 (2.2) 4 (8.9) 0 (0.0) 45 (100.0) JAE 15 (39.5) 19 (50.0) 1 (2.6) 1 (2.6) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 1 (2.6) 1 (2.6) 0 (0.0) 38 (100.0) JAL 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 27 (96.4) 0 (0.0) 1 (3.6) 28 (100.0) JAR 38 (54.3) 8 (11.4) 0 (0.0) 16 (22.9) 1 (1.4) 1 (1.4) 1 (1.4) 5 (7.1) 0 (0.0) 70 (100.0) JMAR 14 (12.0) 15 (12.8) 4 (3.4) 19 (16.2) 11 (9.4) 28 (23.9) 3 (2.6) 22 (18.8) 1 (0.9) 117 (100.0) MAR 17 (8.6) 7 (3.6) 52 (26.4) 7 (3.6) 31 (15.7) 49 (24.9) 4 (2.0) 29 (14.7) 1 (0.5) 197 (100.0) RAS 19 (90.5) 2 (9.5) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 21 (100.0) TAR 37 (33.3) 18 (16.2) 2 (1.8) 27 (24.3) 1 (0.9) 9 (8.1) 0 (0.0) 15 (13.5) 2 (1.8) 111 (100.0) AOS and MAR 17 (3.8) 13 (2.9) 70 (15.5) 33 (7.3) 77 (17.1) 131 (29.0) 11 (2.4) 96 (21.3) 3 (0.7) 451 (100.0) Other 8 Journals 152 (32.7) 65 (14.0) 8 (1.7) 83 (17.8) 14 (3.0) 48 (10.3) 38 (8.2) 53 (11.4) 4 (0.8) 465 (100.0) Total 169 (18.4) 78 (8.5) 78 (8.5) 116 (12.7) 91 (9.9) 179 (19.5) 49 (5.3) 149 (16.3) 7 (0.7) 916 (100.0) 4 Row percentages, thus indicating the coverage of research methods by journal. HMAR/1.1/39 TABLE 3 (cont.) Panel C: Management Accounting Source Disciplines by Journal Economics Psychology Sociology Other Multiple Total AOS 32 (12.6)5 37 (14.6) 151 (59.4) 0 (0.0) 34 (13.4) 254 (100.0) BRIA 3 (8.6) 12 (34.3) 10 (28.6) 0 (0.0) 10 (28.6) 35 (100.0) CAR 34 (75.6) 6 (13.3) 2 (4.4) 1 (2.2) 2 (4.4) 45 (100.0) JAE 36 (94.7) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 2 (5.3) 38 (100.0) JAL 15 (53.6) 0 (0.0) 5 (17.9) 0 (0.0) 8 (28.6) 28 (100.0) JAR 50 (71.4) 15 (21.4) 2 (2.9) 1 (1.4) 2 (2.9) 70 (100.0) JMAR 43 (36.8) 19 (16.2) 27 (23.1) 10 (8.5) 18 (15.4) 117 (100.0) MAR 59 (29.9) 11 (5.6) 111 (56.3) 3 (1.5) 13 (6.6) 197 (100.0) RAS 21 (100.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 21 (100.0) TAR 67 (60.4) 21 (18.9) 12 (10.8) 1 (0.9) 10 (9.0) 111 (100.0) AOS and MAR 91 (20.2) 48 (10.6) 262 (58.1) 3 (0.7) 47 (10.4) 451 (100.0) Other 8 Journals 269 (57.8) 73 (15.7) 58 (12.5) 13 (2.8) 52 (11.2) 465 (100.0) Total 360 (39.3) 121 (13.2) 320 (34.9) 16 (1.7) 99 (10.8) 916 (100.0) 5 Row percentages, thus indicating the coverage of source disciplines by journal. HMAR/1.1/40 TABLE 4 Article Characteristics: Cross-tabulation of Methods and Topics Panel A: Management Accounting Research Methods by Topic Cost Control Other Total Analytical 561 (31.6)2 96 (14.9) 17 (17.9) 169 (18.4) Archival 27 (15.3) 49 (7.6) 2 (2.1) 78 (8.5) Case 15 (8.5) 51 (7.9) 12 (12.6) 78 (8.5) Experiment 15 (8.5) 92 (14.3) 9 (9.5) 116 (12.7) Field 12 (6.8) 71 (11.0) 8 (8.4) 91 (9.9) Frameworks 29 (16.4) 127 (19.7) 23 (24.2) 179 (19.5) Review 6 (3.4) 32 (5.0) 11 (11.6) 49 (5.3) Survey 14 (7.9) 123 (19.1) 12 (12.6) 149 (16.3) Other 3 (1.7) 3 (0.5) 1 (1.1) 7 (0.7) Total 177 (100.0) 644 (100.0) 95 (100.0) 916 (100.0) 1 Number of articles. 2 Column percentages, thus indicating the coverage of research methods by topic. Panel B: Management Accounting Research Topics by Method Cost Control Other Total Analytical 56 (33.1)3 96 (56.8) 17 (10.1) 169 (100.0) Archival 27 (34.6) 49 (62.8) 2 (2.6) 78 (100.0) Case 15 (19.2) 51 (65.4) 12 (15.4) 78 (100.0) Experiment 15 (12.9) 92 (79.3) 9 (7.8) 116 (100.0) Field 12 (13.2) 71 (78.0) 8 (8.8) 91 (100.0) Frameworks 29 (16.2) 127 (70.9) 23 (12.8) 179 (100.0) Review 6 (12.2) 32 (65.3) 11 (22.4) 49 (100.0) Survey 14 (9.4) 123 (82.6) 12 (8.1) 149 (100.0) Other 3 (42.9) 3 (42.9) 1 (14.2) 7 (100.0) Total 177 (19.3) 644 (70.3) 95 (10.4) 916 (100.0) 3 Row percentages, thus indicating the coverage of research topics by method. HMAR/1.1/41 TABLE 5 Article Characteristics: Cross-tabulation of Methods and Source Disciplines Panel A: Management Accounting Research Methods by Source Discipline Economics Psychology Sociology Other Multiple Total Analytical 1631 (45.3)2 1 (0.8) 1 (0.3) 2 (12.5) 2 (2.0) 169 (18.4) Archival 62 (17.2) 6 (5.0) 3 (0.9) 3 (18.8) 4 (4.0) 78 (8.5) Case 11 (3.1) 2 (1.7) 56 (17.5) 0 (0.0) 9 (9.1) 78 (8.5) Experiment 26 (7.2) 64 (52.9) 10 (3.1) 0 (0.0) 16 (16.2) 116 (12.7) Field 13 (3.6) 5 (4.1) 65 (20.3) 1 (6.3) 7 (7.1) 91 (9.9) Frameworks 40 (11.1) 6 (5.0) 103 (32.2) 8 (50.0) 22 (22.2) 179 (19.5) Review 22 (6.1) 2 (1.7) 10 (3.1) 1 (6.3) 14 (14.1) 49 (5.3) Survey 19 (5.3) 35 (28.9) 70 (21.9) 1 (6.3) 24 (24.2) 149 (16.3) Other 4 (0.11) 0 (0.0) 2 (0.6) 0 (0.0) 1 (1.0) 7 (0.7) Total 360 (100.0) 121 (100.0) 320 (100.0) 16 (100.0) 99 (100.0) 916 (100.0) 1 Number of articles. 2 Column percentages, thus indicating the coverage of research methods by source discipline. Panel B: Management Accounting Source Disciplines by Method Economics Psychology Sociology Other Multiple Total Analytical 163 (96.4)3 1 (0.6) 1 (0.6) 2 (1.2) 2 (1.2) 169 (100.0) Archival 62 (79.5) 6 (7.7) 3 (3.8) 3 (3.8) 4 (5.1) 78 (100.0) Case 11 (14.1) 2 (2.6) 56 (71.8) 0 (0.0) 9 (11.5) 78 (100.0) Experiment 26 (22.4) 64 (55.2) 10 (8.6) 0 (0.0) 16 (13.8) 116 (100.0) Field 13 (14.3) 5 (5.5) 65 (71.4) 1 (1.1) 7 (7.7) 91 (100.0) Frameworks 40 (22.3) 6 (3.4) 103 (57.5) 8 (4.5) 22 (12.3) 179 (100.0) Review 22 (44.9) 2 (4.1) 10 (20.4) 1 (2.0) 14 (28.6) 49 (100.0) Survey 19 (12.8) 35 (23.5) 70 (47.0) 1 (0.7) 24 (16.1) 149 (100.0) Other 4 (57.1) 0 (0.0) 2 (28.6) 0 (0.0) 1 (14.3) 7 (100.0) Total 360 (39.3) 121 (13.2) 320 (34.9) 16 (1.7) 99 (10.8) 916 (100.0) 3 Row percentages, thus indicating the coverage of source disciplines by method. HMAR/1.1/42 TABLE 6 Article Characteristics: Cross-tabulation of Source Disciplines and Topics Panel A: Management Accounting Source Disciplines by Topic Cost Control Other Total Economics 1211 (68.4)2 208 (32.3) 31 (32.6) 360 (39.3) Psychology 13 (7.3) 103 (16.0) 5 (5.3) 121 (13.2) Sociology 31 (17.5) 249 (38.7) 40 (42.1) 320 (34.9) Other 5 (2.8) 8 (1.2) 3 (3.2) 16 (1.7) Multiple 7 (4.0) 76 (11.8) 16 (16.8) 99 (10.8) Total 177 (100.0) 644 (100.0) 95 (100.0) 916 (100.0) 1 Number of articles. 2 Column percentages, thus indicating the coverage of source disciplines by topic. Panel B: Management Accounting Topics by Source Discipline Cost Control Other Total Economics 121 (33.6)3 208 (57.8) 31 (8.6) 360 (100.0) Psychology 13 (10.7) 103 (85.1) 5 (4.1) 121 (100.0) Sociology 31 (9.7) 249 (77.8) 40 (12.5) 320 (100.0) Other 5 (31.3) 8 (50.0) 3 (18.8) 16 (100.0) Multiple 7 (7.1) 76 (76.8) 16 (16.2) 99 (100.0) Total 177 (19.3) 644 (70.3) 95 (10.4) 916 (100.0) 3 Row percentages, thus indicating the coverage of topics by source discipline. HMAR/1.1/43 TABLE 7 Authoring Characteristics Panel A: Articles Num ber of Articles Authors Pct. 1 605 67.4 2 135 15.0 3 60 6.7 4 41 4.6 5 14 1.6 6 15 1.7 7 6 0.7 8 6 0.7 9 4 0.4 10+ 12 1.3 Total 898 100.0 Panel B: Journals Journals 1 2 3 4 56+ Sum 1 605 50 14 3 2 2 676 2 85 29 18 4 6142 3 17 15 6 13 51 4 5 2 13 20 5 066 6 3 3 605 135 60 41 14 43 898 Num ber of Articles Published Panel C: Topics Topics 1 2 3 4 56+ Sum 1 605 50 10 2 1 2 670 2 85 30 16 5 7143 3 20 16 5 11 52 4 7 3 13 23 5 066 6 2 2 7 1 1 8 1 1 605 135 60 41 14 43 898 Num ber of Articles Published HMAR/1.1/44 TABLE 7 (cont.) Panel D: Methods Methods 1 2 3 4 56+ Sum 1 605 74 21 11 2 5 718 2 61 31 16 5 4117 3 8 12 5 15 40 4 2 2 15 19 5 033 6 1 1 605 135 60 41 14 43 898 Num ber of Articles Published Panel E: Source Disciplines Disciplines 1 2 3 4 56+ Sum 1 605 89 35 18 4 11 762 2 46 18 14 4 19 101 3 7 8 4 625 4 1 2 710 605 135 60 41 14 43 898 Num ber of Articles Published Panel F: Authors Num ber of Authors Articles Pct. 9 1 0.1 6 4 0.4 5 3 0.3 4 18 2.0 3 149 16.3 2 357 39.0 1 384 41.9 Total 916 100.0 HMAR/1.1/45 TABLE 8 Article Citation Patterns Panel A: By Topic Citations From Ļ To ĺ Cost Control Other Total Cost 2801 (55.6)2 196 (38.9) 27 (5.4) 504 (100.0) Control 226 (6.8) 2,788 (84.0) 305 (9.2) 3,320 (100.0) Other 57 (12.1) 261 (55.5) 151 (32.1) 470 (100.0) 1 Number of citations. 2 Row percentages, thus indicating the percentage citations from each topic area into itself as well as the other topic areas. Panel B: By Research Method Citations From Ļ To ĺ Analytical Archival Case Experiment Field Framework Review Survey Other Total Analytical 3203 (77.5)4 24 (5.8) 2 (0.5) 5 (1.2) 8 (1.9) 13 (3.1) 25 (6.1) 12 (2.9) 4 (1.0) 413 (100.0) Archival 29 (14.2) 70 (34.3) 8 (3.9) 8 (3.9) 9 (4.4) 28 (13.7) 12 (5.9) 39 (19.1) 1 (0.5) 204 (100.0) Case 4 (1.0) 4 (1.0) 55 (14.0) 5 (1.3) 65 (16.5) 186 (47.2) 31 (7.9) 43 (10.9) 1 (0.3) 394 (100.0) Experiment 56 (10.6) 9 (1.7) 6 (1.1) 215 (40.9) 25 (4.8) 41 (7.8) 71 (13.5) 103 (19.6) 0 (0.0) 526 (100.0) Field 9 (1.8) 13 (2.6) 38 (7.5) 19 (3.7) 90 (17.7) 202 (39.8) 17 (3.3) 120 (23.6) 0 (0.0) 508 (100.0) Frameworks 40 (4.9) 35 (4.3) 70 (8.6) 43 (5.3) 105 (12.9) 362 (44.3) 51 (6.2) 106 (13.0) 5 (0.6) 817 (100.0) Review 46 (10.3) 12 (2.7) 7 (1.6) 55 (12.3) 37 (8.3) 82 (18.3) 64 (14.3) 145 (32.4) 0 (0.0) 448 (100.0) Survey 48 (5.1) 25 (2.6) 34 (3.6) 93 (9.8) 97 (10.3) 127 (13.4) 51 (5.4) 471 (49.8) 0 (0.0) 946 (100.0) Other 4 (11.1) 2 (5.6) 1 (2.8) 0 (0.0) 4 (11.1) 6 (16.7) 1 (2.8) 18 (50.0) 0 (0.0) 36 (100.0) 3 Number of citations. 4 Row percentages, thus indicating the percentage citations from each research method into itself as well as the other research methods. HMAR/1.1/46 TABLE 8 (cont.) Panel C: By Source Discipline Citations From Ļ To ĺ Economics Psychology Sociology Other Multiple Total Economics 7525 (76.1)6 55 (5.6) 114 (11.5) 4 (0.4) 63 (6.4) 988 (100.0) Psychology 102 (21.2) 166 (34.5) 135 (28.1) 1 (0.2) 77 (16.0) 481 (100.0) Sociology 321 (16.4) 158 (8.1) 1,284 (65.5) 20 (1.0) 178 (9.1) 1,961 (100.0) Other 17 (48.6) 1 (2.9) 11 (31.4) 2 (5.7) 4 (11.4) 35 (100.0) Multiple 207 (25.1) 147 (17.8) 344 (41.6) 3 (0.4) 125 (15.1) 826 (100.0) 5 Number of citations. 6 Row percentages, thus indicating the percentage citations from each source discipline into itself as well as the other source disciplines. HMAR/1.1/47 TABLE 9 Citations across Journal Subnetworks1 Citations From Ļ To ĺ AOS and MAR Other 8 Journals Total AOS and MAR 1,6301 (71.4)2 653 (28.6) 2,283 (100.0) Other 8 Journals 597 (38.6) 951 (61.4) 1,548 (100.0) 1 Number of citations. 2 Row percentages. HMAR/1.1/48 TABLE 10 Network Centrality1 Panel A: All Journals 1 Twenty-five authors with highest INDEGREE listed in descending order. INDEGREE is the number of individuals in the network who cite the author. OUTDEGREE is the number of individuals in the network cited by the author. Author Indegree Outdegree KAPLAN R. S. 179 32 YOUNG S. M. 156 114 BAIMAN S. 148 28 BROWNELL P. 130 22 MERCHANT K. A. 128 26 SHIELDS M. D. 125 130 GOVINDARAJAN V. 121 6 BANKER R. D. 105 57 HOPWOOD A. G. 100 27 CHOW C. W. 92 86 SIMONS R. 92 20 BIRNBERG J. G. 90 57 HIRST M. K. 87 61 CHENHALL R. H. 84 49 FOSTER G. 82 21 DATAR S.M. 81 13 COOPER D. J. 75 26 LARCKER D. F. 74 65 GUPTA M. 72 26 COVALESKI M. A. 69 56 SCAPENS R. W. 69 44 GUPTA A. K. 69 3 EVANS J. H. 68 21 GORDON L. A. 68 18 HOPPER T. 66 50 HMAR/1.1/49 TABLE 10 (cont.) Panel B: AOS and MAR Author Indegree Outdegree HOPWOOD A.G. 84 25 COOPER D.J. 68 24 GOVINDARAJAN V. 68 1 HOPPER T. 59 43 BERRY A.J. 57 10 MERCHANT K.A. 55 17 SIMONS R. 51 8 BIRNBERG J.G. 50 5 SCAPENS R.W. 46 41 GUPTA A.K. 45 1 GORDON L.A. 43 6 YOUNG S.M. 41 25 COVALESKI M.A. 40 39 SHIELDS M.D. 39 42 DENT J.F. 39 25 DIRSMITH M.W. 39 14 ROBERTS J. 39 10 MACINTOSH N.B. 38 30 OTLEY D.T. 38 30 NARAYANAN V.K. 38 2 CHENHALL R.H. 37 31 BROWNELL P. 37 13 HARRISON G.L. 33 25 TUROPOLEC L. 33 3 CAPPS T. 33 2 FERGUSON P. 33 2 LOWE E.A. 33 2 HMAR/1.1/50 TABLE 10 (cont.) Panel C: Other 8 Journals Edited in North America Author Indegree Outdegree BAIMAN S. 106 15 BANKER R.D. 85 44 YOUNG S.M. 83 70 DATAR S.M. 70 13 BROWNELL P. 66 2 SHIELDS M.D. 62 71 CHOW C.W. 61 50 KAPLAN R.S. 60 19 FOSTER G. 59 14 EVANS J.H 57 20 GUPTA M. 54 25 WALLER W.S. 54 7 MERCHANT K.A. 48 7 REICHELSTEIN S. 44 32 LARCKER D.F. 42 51 DEMSKI J.S. 42 40 SELTO F.H. 39 29 HIRST M.K. 38 27 PENNO M. 37 17 RAJAN M.V. 35 26 POTTER G. 35 22 NOREEN E.W. 35 11 ANDERSON S.W. 34 16 DYE R.A. 34 8 MELUMAD N. 33 22 KEKRE S. 33 1 HMAR/1.1/51 TABLE 11 Journal Network Statistics Journal Size Density Inclusiveness Authors Rank % Rank Number1 % Rank AOS 283 1 2.35% 2 267 94.3% 1 BRIA 51 8 0.47% 10 14 27.5% 10 CAR 74 6 0.76% 9 23 31.1% 9 JAE 60 7 2.34% 3 37 61.7% 6 JAL 48 9 1.91% 4 25 52.1% 7 JAR 79 5 3.25% 1 52 65.8% 4 JMAR 185 3 1.49% 5 120 64.9% 5 MAR 263 2 0.89% 8 189 71.9% 2 RAS 32 10 1.41% 6 11 34.4% 8 TAR 166 4 0.93% 7 119 71.7% 3 AOS and MAR 498 2 1.31% 2 444 89.2% 1 Other 8 Journals 501 1 1.48% 1 433 86.4% 2 Overall 898 - 1.13% - 815 90.8% - 1 Number of authors in a network minus the number of isolated authors. HMAR/1.1/52 TABLE 12 Frequency of Articles that Cite Foucault, Habermas, Giddens, and Latour Cite Do Not Cite AOS 39 (15.4)1 215 (84.6) BRIA 2 (5.7) 33 (94.3) CAR 0 (0.0) 45 (100.0) JAE 0 (0.0) 38 (100.0) JAL 1 (3.6) 27 (96.4) JAR 0 (0.0) 70 (100.0) JMAR 6 (5.1) 111 (94.9) MAR 14 (7.1) 183 (92.9) RAS 0 (0.0) 21 (100.0) TAR 2 (1.8) 109 (98.2) AOS and MAR 53 (11.8) 398 (88.2) Other 8 Journals 11 (2.4) 454 (97.6) Total 64 (7.0) 852 (93.0) 1 Row percentages, thus indicating the percentage of articles by journal that cite vs. not cite the four theorists – Foucault, Habermas, Giddens, and Latour. HMAR/1.1/53 FIGURE 1 Panel A: All Journals HMAR/1.1/54 FIGURE 1 (cont.) Panel B: AOS and MAR HMAR/1.1/55 FIGURE 1 (cont.) Panel C: Other 8 Journals Edited in North America HMAR/1.1/56 Footnotes 㸯 The 10 journals are: Accounting Organizations and Society (AOS), Behavioral Research in Accounting (BRIA), Contemporary Accounting Research (CAR), Journal of Accounting and Economics (JAE), Journal of Accounting Literature (JAL), Journal of Accounting Research (JAR), Journal of Management Accounting Research (JMAR), Management Accounting Research (MAR), Review of Accounting Studies (RAS), and The Accounting Review (TAR). We discuss the journal and article selection criteria in more detail in Section 2.1. 㸰 The only other citation study focused on management accounting (Mensah, Hwang, & Wu, 2004) only considers management accounting articles in four journals – AOS, JAE, JAR, and TAR – primarily because of these journals’ coverage by electronic databases. 㸱 Two authors classified each article’s specialty area (financial, managerial, auditing, tax, systems) and flagged articles for which they failed to reach a decision. All authors then reviewed and discussed the flagged articles to achieve consensus on their specialty area classifications. 㸲 Shields (1997) also provided a summary discussion of the content of the surveyed articles, thus focusing on the studies’ results and the settings in which the results were obtained in addition to examining topics, methods, and source disciplines. 㸳 SSCI only recently started indexing CAR, beginning with the first issue of 2002 (Vol. 19). 㸴 This measure is subject to error. Sources of error include incorrect spelling and bad attribution (e.g., wrong year, journal). In a few cases, authors changed names (e.g., by marriage) or used different name forms (e.g., Smith-Jones vs. Smith Jones). To minimize such errors, we examined and corrected all 898 author names in our database, with particular attention paid to names with similar spelling. Catching errors in citations is more difficult, but we created a list of all author-year-journal citations and also examined these for errors. 㸵 This finding is consistent with a study by Selto and Widener (2005) using a database consisting of eight overlapping journals (AOS, CAR, JAE, JAR, JMAR, MAR, RAS, and TAR) in a 5-year period (1996-2000), although the article classifications themselves, as well as the approach they use to classify them, are different from those in our study. This finding is also broadly consistent with Lowe and Locke (2005) where AOS and MAR receives higher survey-based journal quality scores as “interpretive/critical” journals than as “functionalist/positivist” journals. For JAE, JAR, JMAR, and TAR, the opposite is true. BRIA, CAR, RAS, and JAL were scored by relatively few of the surveyed academics (less than 30), making inferences about them less reliable (Lowe & Locke, 2005). 㸶 Of the 57 authors with five or more articles (Table 7, Panel A), 21 (37%) still publish in only either of the two groups of journals. 㸷 Other forms of communication exist, including, but not limited to conference presentations, workshops, and published working papers such as through the Social Science Research Network (Brown & Laksmana, 2004; Brown, 2005). 㸯㸮 We adjust the citation matrix for coauthor citations. For example, a citation from Brownell and Merchant (1990) to another article by P. Brownell would be counted as a citation from K. A. Merchant to P. Brownell. But since P. Brownell is a coauthor, it is not a citation from K. A. Merchant to P. Brownell as much as it is a citation from K. A. Merchant’s coauthor (P. Brownell) to his own work. Therefore, we adjust the Merchant-to-Brownell citation count for such coauthor citations. 㸯㸯 Note that an author may cite other works by an individual that are outside of the 10 journals in this study, including, among others, books, working papers, and articles in other journals. Our measure of the strength of association among authors may be biased downward, mostly affecting individuals publishing outside of the 10 HMAR/1.1/57 accounting journals in our sample. However, to the extent that the journals in our sample represent adequate coverage of the outlets for managerial accounting research, the bias in this measure should be limited. 㸯㸰 Indegree is the number of individuals in a network who cite an author; it is different from citations that count the number of articles that cite an author. Indegree can be larger than citation count. For example, assume that only one article cites an author; then the author’s citation count is 1. If that article has four coauthors, however, the author’s indegree is 4. Similarly, indegree can also be smaller than citation count. Because citation counts include all citations to an author, they can include multiple citations from different articles (co)authored by the same individual. Indegree, in contrast, counts each individual that cites an author only once. 㸯㸱 R. S. Kaplan also appears in Panel C of Table 10, which focuses on the subnetwork of eight journals that are edited in North America, with an indegree of 60. Some may be tempted to subtract 60 from R. S. Kaplan’s overall indegree of 179 (in Panel A) to conclude that his indegree in Panel B, which focuses on the subnetwork around AOS and MAR, should be 119, which would make him first in that subnetwork. However, R. S. Kaplan does not appear in Panel B. This is not an error. R. S. Kaplan published two articles in AOS and MAR from 1981 to 2000, and has an indegree of 25 in that subnetwork; that is, he has been cited by 25 different authors in the AOS and MAR subnetwork. In the subnetwork of eight journals that are edited in North America, Kaplan has been cited by 60 different authors in that subnetwork. Only when combining subnetworks, citations across both are counted, resulting in a total indegree of 179. 㸯㸲 For example, imagine a network of 10 authors. If each author cites or is being cited by only one author, the network density is at its minimum of 5.6% (5/90) with inclusiveness at its maximum of 100% [(10-0)/10]. On the other hand, a network with four completely connected authors and six isolated authors has a density of 13.3% (12/90) and only 40% inclusiveness [(10-6)/10]. 㸯㸳 Because of the large number of authors, a directed graph of all authors would be a dense maze of uninterpretable lines. The choice of eight or more citations among any two authors as a restriction is admittedly arbitrary, but decreasing the cutoff (to four, say) adds more points and lines, obscuring the key relations in a dense network of lines and points. Parsimony retains the key attributes of the network while making interpretation feasible. When we split the overall network into the two subnetworks around AOS and MAR vs. the other eight journals, we are able to reduce the cutoff value to four and five citations, respectively, while maintaining visual interpretability. 㸯㸴 One might observe that R. S. Kaplan is not central in this diagram, despite having the highest indegree in our dataset (Table 10, Panel A). As mentioned above, our diagrams capture the foremost relationships among authors in the various networks. In this situation, R. S. Kaplan is not a central author, despite having the greatest influence among all authors, overall. In other words, R. S. Kaplan has broad influence but not repeated interactions with influential authors. Or, as Figure 1, Panel A, shows, only S. M. Young has cited R. S. Kaplan more than eight times (which is the cutoff value for inclusion in this diagram). If we were able to make sense out of a graph with 898 authors, we would see R. S. Kaplan with 179 lines and his would be the densest node. 㸯㸵 Examining authorship, we find that 55% (45%) of the management accounting articles in AOS have at least one (no) North-American affiliated author at the time of publication. For the other journals, the breakdown in authorship of management accounting articles by geographical affiliation is 89/11 for BRIA, 96/4 for CAR, 100/0 for JAE, 96/4 for JAL, 90/10 for JAR, 91/9 for JMAR, 17/83 for MAR, 90/10 for RAS, and 95/5 for TAR. This indicates that the eight journals in our sample that are edited in North America are North-American centric in terms of authorship of the articles that they publish, which is not, or less, true for AOS and MAR.