This article was originally published in a journal published by Elsevier, and the attached copy is provided by Elsevier for the author’s benefit and for the benefit of the author’s institution, for non-commercial research and educational use including without limitation use in instruction at your institution, sending it to specific colleagues that you know, and providing a copy to your institution’s administrator. All other uses, reproduction and distribution, including without limitation commercial reprints, selling or licensing copies or access, or posting on open internet sites, your personal or institution’s website or repository, are prohibited. For exceptions, permission may be sought for such use through Elsevier’s permissions site at: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/permissionusematerial Author's personal copy Management accounting as practice Thomas Ahrens a,*, Christopher S. Chapman b,1 a Accounting Group, Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom b Saı¨d Business School, University of Oxford, Park End Street, Oxford OX1 1HP, United Kingdom Abstract In this paper we outline a distinctive practice theory approach to considering the role of management accounting in the constitution of organizations. Building on [Schatzki, T.R. (2002). The site of the social: a philosophical account of the constitution of social life and change. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press] notion of arrays of activity we emphasise the ways in which organisational members actively reconstitute their management control systems by drawing on them as a shared resource. By tracing the skilful practices through which social actors in a restaurant chain understand and mobilise accounting to contribute in specific ways to what they regard as the objectives of their organisational units, we develop a notion of situated functionality. Situating the interrelationships between technical and interpretive accounting processes in the wider field of organisational practices we elaborate the ways in which management control systems as structures of intentionality both shape and are shaped by shared norms and understandings. 2006 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Historical and contemporary studies of accounting have shed light on the diverse ways in which accounting has been and is being implicated in a wide range of activities and social arrangements. Those studies have furthered our understanding of the constitutive powers of accounting in relation to organisations and society which has become a popular research topic for interpretive accounting research (Hopwood & Miller, 1994). In the endeavour to shed light on the particular meanings of (and uses for) accounting in specific locales, interpretive studies have, in some form or other, sought to explore the ways in which [...] the social, or the environment, as it were, passes through accounting. Conversely, accounting ramifies, extends and shapes the social (Burchell, Clubb, & Hopwood, 1985, p. 385). Here, the orderly properties of the social arrangements around accounting have been conceived as a direct outcome of practical activity, avoiding analytical distinctions between high-level 0361-3682/$ - see front matter 2006 Published by Elsevier Ltd. doi:10.1016/j.aos.2006.09.013 * Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 0 24 76572953. E-mail addresses: thomas.ahrens@wbs.ac.uk (T. Ahrens), Chris.Chapman@sbs.ox.ac.uk (C.S. Chapman). 1 Tel.: +44 0 1865 288908. www.elsevier.com/locate/aos Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy structures and low-level action. Accounting cannot be understood simply with reference to its supposed functional properties because it is implicated in the shaping of its own context. Debunking the hold that powerful structures were supposed to have on the functioning of accounting has a distinguished history. Early interpretive studies of accounting have frequently sought to correct the simplifications of functionalist studies. They have shown that organisational objectives, which, from a functionalist point of view, should determine the uses of accounting, are rarely clear-cut and that they frequently follow, not precede, calculation (Cohen, March, & Olson, 1972; March, 1987). Accounting and organisational objectives are interdependent in the sense that objectives are influenced by the knowledge of potential accountings (Swieringa & Weick, 1987). Moreover, objectives may be continuously reformulated in the light of new information and revised calculations (Den Hertog, 1978; Hedberg & Jo¨nsson, 1978; Preston, Cooper, & Coombs, 1992). Accounting thus lends itself to multiple political uses (Bariff & Galbraith, 1978; Markus & Pfeffer, 1983; Wildavsky, 1978). A key insight was that organisational actors retain some degree of choice between strategic objectives and specific solutions (Child, 1972). They can draw on the multiple conceptualisations of accounting and its uses that circulate in organisations (Ahrens & Chapman, 2002; Boland & Pondy, 1983; Chua, 1995; Mouritsen, 1999). Besides being used for the deliberation of future alternatives, accounting is a vital resource for making sense of past decisions and the present to which they have lead (Ansari & Euske, 1987; Brunsson, 1990). It is as much implicated in decision-making as in processes of organisational learning, bargaining, and rationalisation (Burchell, Clubb, Hopwood, Hughes, & Nahapiet, 1980). The cumulative effect of such interpretive studies of accounting has been to establish the flexibility and variability of accounting (Dent, 1986) and the unintended consequences of accounting systems (Burchell et al., 1980; Den Hertog, 1978; Hedberg, Nystrom, & Starbuck, 1976). Whilst early interpretive studies were theoretically well-founded and supported by field research and archival study, they also portrayed accounting often as ‘just political’, ‘unintended’, ‘temporary’, etc., foregrounding its political, symbolic, and ritual functions. They left relatively unexplored the practical commercial and strategic uses of accounting. Understandably, in seeking to correct the simplifications of functionalism early interpretive studies have tended to downplay the ways in which accounting can and does help organisations through its role in the constitution of particular functionalities. Organisational members may well be aware of the limitations of accounting and reporting practices. Nevertheless they draw on them, for example, to discharge formal obligations, communicate with colleagues, pursue informal objectives, avoid switching costs, etc. Through such uses, accounting can potentially make significant contributions to the ways in which organisational motivations take shape and organisations coordinate intentional action. The interlacing of political, commercial, and technical uses of accounting has been illustrated by Bower’s (1970) study of the resource allocation process for four specific investment projects in four business units of a large US chemicals company. He showed in great detail how different business environments and strategies, the business units’ and the corporation’s formal organisation and policies (including their accounting systems), and individual organisational members’ values, desires, feelings, and judgements of the strategic, commercial, technical, and political potential of their projects affect their evolution and eventual acceptance or rejection. While the evidence reveals the relative unimportance of a particular technique of financial analysis and limited usefulness of the [theoretical] financial model, it also indicates that management can control the investment process (Bower, 1970, p. 279). The organisational work of contextualising the projects in ways that disposed other organisational members favourably towards them lay at the heart of preparing a successful investment proposal. Bower was aware of many of the shortcomings of accounting that later became an important theme for the interpretive literature but he was 6 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy more interested in how organisational members can shape and pursue organisational objectives with accounting nevertheless. He ended his book with a call for a ‘‘conditional theory of organization’’ (p. 318) to explain the scope of managers in influencing structural aspects of organisations in particular contexts. In a similar vein, and with the benefit of having witnessed the beginnings of a contingency theory of accounting, Hopwood (1989) sought to circumscribe the practical character of accounting by articulating a vision of the study of accounting practices as finely graded, highly specific contingencies in the minds of organisational members who seek to put them to use for their specific priorities. In three short case studies he sought to illustrate [...] a deep interpenetration between the technical practices of accounting, the meanings and significances that are attributed to them and the other organisational practices and processes in which they are embedded’’ (Hopwood, 1989, p. 37). Mindful of the objectives and concerns of senior accountants and managers, and the forms that they were given by existing accounting information systems, Hopwood sought to characterise the implication of accounting in the operational processes of particular organisations. His case descriptions delineated a particular kind of fit between accounting, operations, and strategic priorities. Unlike the fit between generic strategic postures and general accounting system characteristics found in the contingency literature (p. 27), Hopwood sought to convey the practical understandings played out through organisational members’ uses of their accountings. He emphasised the ways in which accounting illuminated key aspects of operations for organisational members, such that they were enabled to evaluate and intervene. In contingency theory, analyses of the fit between context and accounting are supported through questionnaires that collect aggregate information about organisations and their subsystems. By contrast, practice theory seeks to delve into the details of the functioning of subsystems. Practices are about the specific relationships forged between understandings and traditions of social groups and their aspirations and pressing problems. Accounts of order and agreement that refer to practice presume not passive actors but active members, members who reconstitute the system of shared practices by drawing upon it as a set of shared resources [...] (Barnes, 2001, pp. 17–18). Like Barnes’ (2001) notion of practice, Hopwood’s (1987, 1989) concept of the social embeddedness of accounting had a distinctive normative dimension. Organisational members develop and judge the shared understandings of accounting and organisational process, on which they base their managerial efforts. Accounting, like Barnes’ (2001) practice, is reconstituted in the act of it being drawn upon as a resource (c.f., Swidler, 1986). Hopwood’s (1987) advice to study the historical layers of accounting systems to understand the complex relationships between accounting and organisational priorities over time acknowledged the simultaneously functional and normative aspects of managerial agency. Of the myriad organisational narratives available, he focused on those that, through the visibilities accorded them through accounting, had been deemed organisationally significant by organisational participants, mostly at the intersection between organisational strategy, key processes of organisational competitiveness, and accounting information systems. The successes of prior studies in exploring the potential reach and roles of accounting practices notwithstanding, the emphasis on accounting as a social and not equally strategic and commercial technology has left an important gap in our understanding of the interconnections between accounting and other organisational practices. Contemporary discussion of management control (e.g., Kaplan & Norton, 1996; Simons, 1995) frequently seek to address strategic concerns. They do not, however, tend to elaborate on the specific activities through which their exhortations might be taken up. How exactly, for example, are managers to make, the Balanced Scorecard the ‘‘cornerstone of a new strategic management system’’ (Kaplan & Norton, 1996, p. 75) and mould it to T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 7 Author's personal copy their own ends? The result is an often unhelpful dynamic in discussions between academic and practitioner accounts of such developments. In this paper we will draw on practice theory in order to attempt to fill these various gaps in our understanding of management accounting in practice. Even though they have often been pursuing highly specific agendas, practice theorists have been concerned to reflect on the ways in which action relates to aspects of context—what Ortner (1984) called ‘‘the system’’—be it primarily political, economic, cultural, or technological. Concerned to correct the relative neglect of action in social theory they have tended to develop theories of how action arises from and structures context, resulting in varying degrees of social order (e.g., Bourdieu, 1977; Giddens, 1984). Neither does an objective system determine activity, nor can social phenomena be explained simply through the aggregation of individual actions. Through the analysis of a longitudinal field study of management control carried out in a UK restaurant chain, we draw on specific lines of practice theorising, in particular Schatzki’s (2001, 2002, 2005), in order to bring out the regularities in the uses of, and arrangements around, accounting as a direct outcome of normative action. Drawing on discussions and observations drawn from across the organisational and functional hierarchy we elaborate the ways in which specific organisational members sought to use accounting to achieve, if not grand strategic missions, at least specific subsets of organisational objectives, what one might call the situated functionality of accounting. Contextualising the local The idea to conceive of social order as a direct outcome of activity is not new in the accounting literature and has given rise to various specific notions of practice. In particular, studies of governmentality have developed a complex notion of the practice of accounting arising from a historical understanding of the disciplinary powers of systematic bodies of knowledge. Broadly speaking, they have sought to delineate the conditions under which accounting became institutionalised in ways that produced specific systematic effects on the constitution and functioning of organisations and states, and thus define what might historically qualify as accounting practices (e.g., Hoskin & Macve, 1986, 1988; Miller & O’Leary, 1987; Miller & Rose, 1990). In so doing, this literature has moved from the implication of accounting in organisational politics and sense-making, which has been an important concern of many studies of accounting and organisational process, to the constitution of organisational process itself. Accounting has been seen to have permeated the fabric of organisations and social institutions, not just as a technology to be used in any which way, but [...] always intrinsically linked to a particular strategic or programmatic ambition [...] to increase efficiency, to promote economic growth, to encourage responsibility, to improve decision making, to enhance competitiveness (Miller, 2001, p. 394). Miller’s insistence on accounting’s inbuilt programmatic ambition in many of his works has helped to establish in the accounting literature the significance of what Goodwin (1994) called a structure of intentionality. Discussing a standard colour scheme used by archaeologists to classify earth colour, Goodwin observed that, of all the possible ways that the earth could be looked at, the perceptual work of students using this form is focused on determining the exact color of a minute sample of dirt. They engage in active cognitive work, but the parameters of that work have been established by the system that is organizing their perception. Insofar as the coding scheme establishes an orientation toward the world, it constitutes a structure of intentionality whose proper locus is not an isolated, Cartesian mind but a much larger organizational system, one that is characteristically mediated through mundane bureaucratic documents such as forms (Goodwin, 1994, p. 609). More generally, charts, maps, and other schemes can powerfully structure the cognitive 8 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy practices of social groups, as can accounting. Accounting rules and categories bias social perception (Cooper, 1980), and the insistence on the structure of intentionality enshrined in accounting convention can obstruct the search for regulatory solutions (Young, 1996). Miller’s work on the programmatic character of accounting has sought to emphasise the highly specific ways in which structures of intentionality can, through ‘‘temporary assemblages’’ of people, accountings, ideas, buildings, material flows, etc., come to be contextualised in particular cases. Rooted in an analysis of the organisational functions of accounting, the governmentality literature, more generally, has opened a particular vista on accounting’s broader social significance beyond the organisation, for example, through histories that relate the emergence of accounting to the spread of novel forms of writing, indexing, and grading (Hoskin & Macve, 1986) or more general political efforts at standardising different spheres of social life (Miller & O’Leary, 1987; Radcliffe, 1998). Studying in this way the conditions under which ‘‘accounting was made practical’’ (Miller & O’Leary, 1990) has avoided the cumbersome distinction between macro structures and micro action by focusing on particular instances in which accounting was implicated in the production of social order. But it has also avoided inquiring into the detailed practices through which accounting is mobilised by organisational members. The practice notion of governmentality has primarily been concerned with the putative origins of action, that is, its generic ‘‘strategic or programmatic ambition’’ (Miller, 2001, p. 394), and not action itself: [...] new calculative practices alter the capacities of agents, organizations, and the connections between them [...] As a technology of power, management accounting is thus a mode of action that does not act directly and immediately on others. Instead, it acts upon the actions of others, and presupposes the freedom to act in one way or another. The agent who is acted upon thus remains an agent faced with a whole field of possible responses and reactions (Miller, 2001, pp. 379–380). On the whole, the practice approach of governmentality studies did not foreground the ways in which accountants and non-accountants alike conceive of and conduct their everyday tasks with reference to accounting and, in one way or another, seek to advance their particular plans through accounting. Practices that would be thus infused with accounting occasionally only shine through the disciplinary histories, for example, when Hermann Haupt, graduate of West Point and newly appointed engineer at the Pennsylvania Railroad, changed freight pricing with the help of novel analyses of fixed and variable costs (Hoskin & Macve, 1988, p. 61). Miller’s (2001) notion of practice, in particular, has steered him away from addressing in detail the uses and functionings of accounting in specific situations. For instance, Miller and O’Leary’s (1994) study of a new manufacturing initiative at Caterpillar Inc. conceived of accounting practices at the level of designing accounting policies, mainly for investment decision making, and building accounting information systems. The relationship between accounting and organisational processes was discussed only to the extent to which it ‘‘rendered them operable.’’ How, or even whether, accounting was mobilised in any particular organisational activity was not discussed. Accounting remained a potential. More generally, all organisational practices were described as successive designs of policies, systems, and architectures that ‘‘sought to act upon’’ organisational members who were mere users of systems and occupants of spaces and whose activities were never described. To relegate practical activity with and through accounting to a secondary class of events whose ‘‘modes’’ are determined by the general historical conditions of the formation of specific accounting constellations (Burchell et al., 1985) is a particular case of top-down history. With the emphasis on the ‘‘temporary assemblages’’ of systems of accounting and other controls, agents can be left with ‘‘the freedom to act in one way or another’’ because that freedom is regarded as inconsequential, not something on which the academic inquiry T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 9 Author's personal copy into the functioning of accounting should concentrate. Interactions between discourses and practices are thus stylised as orchestrations whose potential is determined by successive accounting systems designs. A more detailed concern with the activities of agents might shed more light on the reasons why, and the processes through which—from among many possible programmes, discourses, policies, etc.—some end up in temporary assemblages with particular accountings. The assembly of accounting designs and systems has been of keen interest to another large group of management accounting studies drawing on actor network theory (ANT) and, particularly, the work of Latour and his collaborators. Not so much a theory as a post-humanist ontology to overcome puzzles of social theory—such as the duality of agency and structure, for example— ANT sought to replace notions of social structures, entities, levels, etc. with the concept of heterogeneous networks of humans and nonhumans2 (Latour, 1987, 1996; Law & Hassard, 1999). The networks of ANT are not the structures of traditional sociology. They are not to be confused with the social networks in which humans liaise and ‘‘network’’ (Latour, 1996, p. 373), nor do they exhibit the distance-denying instantaneousness of the world wide web that gives immediate access to discrete pieces of information (Latour, 1999, p. 15). ANT networks come into existence through the circulation or travel of actants, ‘‘something that acts or to which activity is granted by others’’ (Latour, 1996, p. 373). These heterogeneous networks deform or transform the travellers in the process. Actants make up networks, but through processes of transformation the networks also give actants ‘‘actantiality,’’ i.e., ‘‘[...] provide actants with actions, with their subjectivity, with their intentionality, with their morality’’ (Latour, 1999, p. 18). Herein lies an important point of contact between ANT and governmentality research in accounting. Governmentality’s built-in programmatic ambitions of accounting, and the freedom of human actors to draw on them, can be traced as the fabrication of accounting into an actant, made up of humans, accounting rules, reports, computers, etc., ultimately lending accounting actantiality. For ANT, only those people, things, and networks are worthy of study that leave an imprint, that possess actor-like qualities. ANT emerged out of highly specific intellectual concerns, however. Latour appears to have primarily been concerned not with action as such but the delineation of the networks that would allow him to trace action. It is a method to describe the deployment of associations like semiotics; it is a method to describe the generative path of any narration. [...] In itself ANT is not a theory of action, no more than cartography is a theory of the shape of coast lines [...] (Latour, 1996, p. 373–4, italics in original). A stream of studies of budgeting in various national health systems have drawn on ANT as a means to explore exactly such generative paths. Preston et al. (1992) and Bloomfield et al. (1992) for example studied the introduction and emergence of responsibility accounting in the UK hospital sector. Their choice of research settings allowed them a particular advantage in following Latour’s exhortation ‘‘to arrive before the technology is fixed, known and unproblematic’’ (Preston et al., 1992, p. 564). Likewise Chua (1995) emphasised the potential contributions of a study of ‘‘the making up of ‘new’ accounting numbers’’ (p. 115) in her study of the fabrication of a hospital casemix costing and accounting. As with earlier studies such as Pinch, Mulkay, and Ashmore (1989) and Preston et al. (1992) her study emphasised the significance of processes of enrolment and rhetoric (see also Mouritsen, 1999). Latourian analyses have highlighted the changing and fragile nature of management accounting systems, but not in the same manner as early studies of the political and symbolic roles of accounting that emphasised the variability and unintended consequences of accounting. The notion of unintended consequences presumes that accounting systems also possess intended conse2 Computer system architecture (Dechow & Mouritsen, 2005) or ABC costing systems (Briers & Chua, 2001), for example. 10 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy quences, which in turn allows the study of ‘loose coupling’ between formal objectives and everyday action (Berry et al., 1985; Ezzamel & Bourn, 1990). By contrast, ANT was a project meant to redress the privileging of formal objectives. Formal objectives, too, were only a network effect, a fabrication. They were not believed to have powerful implications independent of the details of their fabrication because ANT does not a priori privilege any network locations. Law attributed this to a fear of the ‘‘perils of managerialism’’ (Law, 1991, p. 13) or hero sociology. ANT’s ‘‘principle of symmetry’’ (Latour, 1996) seeks to treat the powerful—managers and accounting system designers, for example—as network members and effects, just like anyone (and anything) else, so as to trace precisely the origins and makeup of their fallible powers. We agree that powerful organisational members inhabit the same field of practices. Their preferences are shaped by this field. They are not ‘outside the network’. A challenge for ANT in relation to the study of management control (at least in commercial organisations) then is that in a management context those who are designing, reading, and interpreting management control systems are in fact a priori privileged. For example, Paolo Quattrone and Hopper (2005) reported on a Japanese head office that insisted on maintaining their preferred accounting configuration when introducing an ERP system, despite the ERP system’s technological imperatives for change. Management may not win all their games all the time, but they are nonetheless more central to bigger and more resourceful networks. Also, their networks and powers possess special qualities. Though they are quantitatively different, they are not only quantitatively different, at least some of the time. Which means, if we concentrate [...] on this alone, we are liable to miss out on some of the ways in which quantity is (reversibly) transmuted into quality. Or, to put it differently, we will miss out on the ways in which the great distributions are laid down and sustained (Law, 1991, p. 14, italics in original). In principle, ANT might discuss the ‘‘great distributions’’, Law’s shorthand for social structures, through much comparative tracing of networks between organisational and extra-organisational, human and non-human allies. In practice, accounting researchers have sometimes restrained the deconstructive impulse of ANT. Mouritsen (1999) researched the network of the relationships between customers, subcontractors, workers, and products through BusinessPrint’s existing management hierarchy, following the leads of the different managers’ priorities and problems (not those of the workers, machines, or products), unearthing how their different capabilities, interests, and objectives gave rise to the conflicting notions of management control and specifically their different concepts of flexibility. Even though the attempts of the CEO of BusinessPrint of turning overheads into direct costs through outsourcing ‘‘[...] quickly spiralled away from [an immediate concern with] indirect costs into areas such as marketing, production, new technology, productivity, and political risk’’ (Mouritsen, 1999, p. 47), this did not, as Law (1991) suspected, invalidate his power or thwart his subsequent efforts to assume greater control. Even though management is not omnipotent, the distributions of power tend to be sufficiently skewed to begin management control research with management strategies and hierarchies, and then see their effects ripple through diverse organisational and extra-organisational processes and artefacts all the way back to the strategists and their ongoing attempts at control. ANT has made an important contribution to the theorising of practice in management accounting. It has shown the significance of actors, action, and inscriptions in the fabrication of social order. Its approach to the study of management control has been distinctively deconstructive, however, in the sense that the intellectual effort has been devoted to untangling processes of ‘inscription’ and ‘fabrication’—what is fabricated, the fabrications themselves, is treated as something of a side effect, a moment of temporary stability that is of little interest in itself. In this we see another parallel with governmentality research in accounting, which tends to be more interested in the programmatic potential of accounting than T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 11 Author's personal copy the temporary assemblages of which it actually becomes part. In the more recent management control literature we see studies inspired by ANT rather than straightforward applications of it. For example, Briers and Chua (2001) developed important contributions to our understanding of ABC through an intellectual bricolage. They enriched the flat ontology of ANT, as set out by Latour, with the concept of the boundary object (Star & Greisemer, 1989). They advanced our insights into ABC, yet their approach was strictly antithetical to Latour’s notion of ANT. The concept of the boundary object allowed traction on notions of intent and interaction in their study. Analysed as a ‘‘visionary boundary object’’ that brings together actors, more than an actant in its own right, the ABC system allowed for the rendering of individual actors’ motivations by providing a context through which these can be seen to interact and affect the shape of the emerging networks. Dechow and Mouritsen (2005) developed this line of reasoning on boundary objects through their discussion of enterprise resource planning systems (ERP) as providing ‘‘trading zones’’ in which organisational actors negotiate the ways in which a new ERP relates to existing reporting practices. The situated functionality of management accounting practice The notions of practice inherent in governmentality and ANT studies have provided important alternatives to conceptualising the functioning of accounting with reference to social structures, entities, levels, etc. We share with governmentality studies an interest in the conditions that render accounting operable in specific modes—developing its potential as a structure of intentionality. Equally concerned with the significance of action, however, we share with ANT an interest in the heterogeneous networks of humans and non-humans through which accounting is fabricated as an actant. In our discussion of management control as practice we would like to give greater prominence to the construction and functioning of managerial intent and some of the ways in which they relate to the situated functionality of accounting. To those ends, we adopt Schatzki’s (2002) definition of practices and their role in social order. For him, [...] the site of the social is composed of nexuses of practices and material arrangements. This means that social life inherently transpires as part of such nexuses. By practices, I mean organized human activities. Examples are political practices, cooking practices, educational practices, management practices, shop floor practices, and design practices. Any practice is an organized, open-ended spatial-temporal manifold of actions (Schatzki, 2005, p. 471). People live meaningful lives by engaging in practices, which are connected with material arrangements. The recognition of material arrangements in social research is familiar from ANT, but how do we know to which practices certain actions belong? The set of actions that composes a practice is organized by three phenomena: understandings of how to do things, rules, and teleoaffective structure. By rules I mean explicit formulations that prescribe, require, or instruct that such and such be done, said, or the case; a teleoaffective structure is an array of ends, projects, uses (of things), and even emotions that are acceptable or prescribed for participants in the practice (Schatzki, 2005, pp. 471–472). Understandings, rules, and the engagements of teleoaffective structure organise chains of action—in Schatzki’s phrase, ‘‘arrays of activity’’ (Schatzki, 2001, p. 2)—which make up practices. Practices are constituted in activity and inherently normative. We are reminded of the programmatic nature of Miller’s (2001) accountings. However, our practice perspective emphasises the role of action in the constitution of such programmes. In this we share the concerns of ANT, but suggest that Schatzki’s (2002) site ontology offers advantages in the study of management control practice because it is more accepting of structures of intentionality. 12 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy Management control as practice is understood as a bundle of practices and material arrangements. Situated in offices and workshops, using configurations of machines and computers, organisational members negotiate strategies, budgets, and performance targets, they discuss ways of realising them, alert others to contingencies, give orders, follow, dispute, or circumvent instructions, generate reports and make comparisons, give and receive advice, find excuses, take corrective action, etc. Those activities occur in chains of actions and within management control practices. They ‘‘[...] also transpire[] as part of these practices: the actions involved help compose the practice’’ (Schatzki, 2005, p. 472, emphasis in original). Also, the ends that organisational members pursue in performing these actions, are contained in the teleoaffective structure of management control practices (such as the desire for commercial success, for example). Acting in those ways is to be carrying on the practice. In this way practice theory offers a way of understanding volition conditioned by systems, but as played out in the moment of action. This intertwining of the explicit rules, procedures, standards, etc. set out in management control systems, with shared normative judgements as to the appropriateness of particular instances of action, holds the promise of locating the much commented upon fluidity and variety of everyday accounting activities (e.g., Burchell et al., 1980; Dent, 1986; Den Hertog, 1978; Hedberg et al., 1976) in a context of shared engagements. The nature of their sharedness lies not in the similarity of activities but in the ways in which actors understand relations between ‘‘ends, projects, uses (of things), and even emotions’’ (Schatzki, 2005, pp. 471–472). Management control is thus skilful practical activity that represents an aspect of social order because of and notwithstanding its fluidity. A practice understanding of management control actively looks for such fluidity, recognising that actors’ accounts of their own activities (and representations of them) are categorically unlike the complex cognitive processes through which they go about accomplishing them. Thus when our informants honestly say ‘this is why we do such things’, or ‘this is what this means’, or ‘this is how we do such things’, instead of being pleased we should be suspicious and ask what kind of peculiar knowledge is this which can take such an explicit, linguistic form? Indeed, we should treat all explicit knowledge as problematic, as a type of knowledge probably remote from that employed in practical activities under normal circumstances (Bloch, 1991, pp. 193–194). Compared to the actor’s unspoken mastery of certain situations, explicit decision rules seem unwieldy and, very often, unrealistic. At the individual level, expert actors tend not to articulate explicit decision rules and ‘apply’ them to situations like a novice would (Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1988). Novice management accountants tend to lack the ability to think through organisational situations with the conceptual schemes that they studied during their training (Ahrens & Chapman, 2000), for example. The usefulness of those schemes for practice only becomes apparent through experience. The ‘‘primacy of practice’’ (Archer, 2000) suggests an analysis of cognition hinging on what we can do, rather than on the application of general rules that seek to describe (or constrain) action. [...] order per se cannot be identified with regularity qua repetition of the same. Recall Wittgenstein’s example: a variety of different activities count as games, and in this sense compose an order, even though what in the world corresponds to the state of order is not the uniform repetition of specific features, but a tangle of samenesses and similarities among the activities involved. Observations such as this suggest that there is more both to the ordering of things and to cognition (including scientific cognition) than regularities and their apprehension (Schatzki, 2001 italics in original). The consequences of such analysis calls into question an analysis of management control systems as a means to transplant particular models of conceptual analysis from powerful centres to controlled peripheries (Latour, 1987). A number of laboratory experiments in the accounting T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 13 Author's personal copy literature have worked with the situated nature of the cognitive processes associated with management accounting and control tasks (e.g., VeraMun˜oz, 1998; Vera-Mun˜oz, Kinney, & Bonner, 2001). In her stylised business resource allocation context, Vera-Mun˜oz (1998) showed that particular norms of presentation and analysis of subjects with more extensive accounting training came to the fore, inhibiting the application of opportunity cost principles. Those same individuals, however, did apply opportunity cost principles in a stylised domestic setting with the same calculative task characteristics. These studies thus gave support to those who drew on notions of cognition in practice to question the idea of transferable skills per se (e.g., Lave, 1988). Key to understanding cognition in practice is that it is distributed over the environment of the actors and that elements of it take place outside their heads, through the meaningful interaction between, for example, charts, images, gestures, or—in relation to this paper—management control systems. Through such mapping, elements of the chart become dynamic, transportable structures. In comparison to the static form of the chart (when the chart is considered to be a self standing, isolated form), the compound multimodal structure is less permanent, but a more powerful, dynamic process. Because this process is largely instantiated in the environment, we can see it and examine its unfolding through time in detail (Alac & Hutchins, 2004, p. 650, emphasis in original). The act of explaining brain functions in this observation was not just relying on an assortment of material props that happened to lie around when the expert explained the brain mapping. The neuroscience chart, for example, was a product of, and contributed to, the wider social context of teaching practices in the laboratory in which it was observed. What looked like the achievements of an individual scientist was really an outcome of the interplay between cognition and specific practice arrangements bundles. The functionality of certain techniques for certain actions could only be established with a view to the practices that were constituted by those actions. For the fieldwork researcher it is important to recognise individual actions as part of larger arrays of activity (i.e. practices) and to engage in an ongoing refinement of the descriptions of certain practices through ongoing reflection on those actions. To summarise, practice arrangements bundles can be related to each other, to other material arrangements, and to other practices. As a totality, the nexus of interdependent practices can be called the ‘field of practices’. Thus, the social is a field of embodied, materially interwoven practices centrally organized around shared practical understandings. This conception contrasts with accounts that privilege individuals, (inter)actions, language, signifying systems, the life world, institutions/roles, structures, or systems in defining the social. These phenomena, say practice theorists, can only be analyzed via the field of practices. Actions, for instance, are embedded in practices, just as individuals are constituted in them. Language, moreover, is a type of activity (discursive) and hence a practice phenomenon, whereas institutions and structures are effects of them (Schatzki, 2001, p. 3). Practice theory does not need higher-level aggregations above practices and practice arrangements bundles. A management control system is a bundle understood as management control practices plus material and technical arrangements. It sees institutions and structures as effects of action as much as the other way around, yet unlike ANT, practice theory assumes that actions are organised around practical understandings, rules, and engagements that define and connect agents qua practitioners. From the perspective of this practice theory approach, the perceived usefulness of management control practices and systems is of paramount importance for researching management control and management accounting more generally. In this paper we set out to understand the constitution and implications of normative aspects of practice as they are observable both 14 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy in activities and through relatively enduring aspects of organisation, such as distributions of power, played out through management control systems. As such our practice approach is suggestive of new insights into the mutual constitution of individual and organisational intent through its theorisation of individuals’ skilful activity as enactments of situated functionality. We seek to demonstrate this through a detailed analysis of various aspects of management control practice that we observed during a longitudinal field study of a UK restaurant chain. Field study Restaurant Division was one of the largest fullservice chain restaurants in the UK. All restaurants were wholly owned by the company and were run by salaried managers. Restaurant Division had enjoyed substantial returns on sales and sales growth over a period of years. This growth had been attained partly through acquisition of smaller chains but mainly through addition of new units. More than 200 restaurants were organised as profit centres which reported into areas and then regions of operational management. Restaurant Division was wholly owned by and reported to a leisure group quoted on the London Stock Exchange, but it was also registered as a company with limited liability and had its own board of directors (Fig. 1). Our fieldwork over a period of a little over two years involved interviews, examination of archival records, and direct observation of meetings and workshops. Table 1 details what might be thought of as formal data collection. Our efforts to delineate the organisation’s structures of intentionality began with questions aimed at eliciting a basic role description from interviewees (from waiters to the managing director). We then asked questions to find out which (if any) performance information interviewees drew on and or worked around in their day-to-day activity. Interviews lasted about seventy minutes on average. Most of them took place with both researchers present, were tape-recorded and subsequently transcribed. Where this was not possible notes were taken during the interview, and more detailed notes were written up as soon afterwards as possible. Over the course of the study we interviewed the entire divisional board and executive Restaurant Division managing director Area managers Restaurant managers Operations regional managers Operations director Central financial services Marketing director Human resources director Finance & commercial director Group board of directors Commercial Finance MIS Based away from head office Fig. 1. Restaurant division organisation chart. T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 15 Author's personal copy committee,3 other head office managers and staff specialists from different functions. In the operations hierarchy we interviewed regional and area managers, and restaurant managers. We reviewed internal planning, control and financial documents, materials used in internal training, computer data entry and reporting screens, etc. These materials were often presented and discussed during interviews, giving interviewees opportunities for talking us through their work. We carried out observations at head office and in restaurants, as well as several residential training sessions. We made visits to 15 restaurants, sometimes more than once, where we either observed performance reviews between restaurant managers and their area manager or interviewed restaurant managers and had shorter meetings with various assistant managers, chefs, and waiting staff. We also took the opportunity to observe restaurants (including kitchens) during opening hours. On two occasions we ordered the same three-course meals in order to assess the standardised nature of portions and presentation. Informally, our presence at coffee breaks and meals during and after our formal observations and interviews meant that we could listen to participants’ observations of, and reactions to, the meetings themselves. On such occasions we also learned about a rich stream of organizational gossip, jokes, and stories, which we used to test our developing understanding of the role of management control systems in Restaurant Division. Our various modes of analysis were overlapping and iterative (Ahrens & Dent, 1998). Interview transcripts and field notes were organized chronologically, and the common issues in the accounts were analysed to understand areas of agreement and disagreement between organizational actors and groups. Archival records were used to elaborate and confirm issues that arose in interviews and observations. We dissected and reorganized the original transcripts around emerging issues of significance to our understanding of management control systems. Findings that did not appear to fit emerging patterns identified in this process were marked for subsequent discussion as the research continued. In the following section we present field material that illustrates management control practices in a way that brings out the fluidity and the directedness of purposeful interconnected social activities in a large and complex organisation. Heedful of Bloch’s (1991) warning against linear explanations of practice, we have worked to intersperse our interview excerpts with information about complementary organisational practices gathered from observation, other interviewees, and documents. As such the interview excerpts do not stand alone as descriptions of practice but are intended as part of a more encompassing ensemble—within the inevitable constraints of textual representation. Menu design as management control practice Since the foundation of Restaurant Division, the concept of branded eating out had lain at the Table 1 Information on formal fieldwork activity Functional breakdown of interviews carried out Central financial services 1 Head office – Commercial 6 Head office – Finance 11 Head office – HR 4 Head office – Managing Director 1 Head office – Marketing 5 Head office – MIS 2 Head office – Operations 4 Area managers 2 Restaurant managers 9 45 Observations and attendance at meetings Area business development meetings 2 Cross functional meeting to discuss the food margin 1 Eating of ‘control’ 3 course meals by both researchers 2 Area manager-Restaurant manager performance reviews (held at individual restaurants) 6 Observation of kitchen operation 2 Residential control workshops 2 Various finance meetings 4 19 3 Comprising all the managers who reported directly to members of the board of directors. 16 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy heart of its strategy. Head office staff designed a food offering and a restaurant ambience for a target clientele, sourced and distributed the dish ingredients, and controlled restaurant performance. Each restaurant sourced its food through the central supply chain. Based on their weekly sales forecasts, the restaurant managers ordered raw materials electronically and the group’s fleet of chilled and frozen food trucks delivered them directly from the division’s central warehouse. In the restaurants, the electronic cash registers recorded the sales volume of each dish. Weekly restaurant reports showed which restaurants had kept within the standards for raw material consumption given the actual dishes sold during that week. The resulting gross profit margin on food4 was calculated both in cash and percentage terms. At the time of the research, profit expectations were 20% of divisional turnover, and, like the group’s other restaurant businesses, Restaurant Division was expected to achieve about 67% food margin. The centrally designed menu, which specified dishes, prices, costs, and sales mix for all of Restaurant Division’s outlets, was a key functional element to realising its commercial objectives. As the number of dishes on the menu grew over the years, increasing analytical effort went into designing a menu that could be expected to achieve financial results in ways that fit with the existing customer base, brand proposition, personnel, and technologies, but also supported planned development of these. Menu design was the responsibility of the marketing planning manager. He worked to produce a commercial proposition that would satisfy Restaurant Division’s diverse strategic, financial, and functional objectives. Starting with a new menu’s planned financial performance he developed forecasts of the consumption of different groups of menu items. From our perspective it’s obviously important that every menu that we put out achieves a certain margin, at the moment that’s about 67, 67.3% [...] looking at the menu as a whole. Clearly, within that menu you have got some items that are low margin and some items that are higher margin [...] our food development team in marketing along with [the commercial manager] and his team will decide which products will get onto the menu. We balance a certain element of new products with a mix of, like the old favourites. And what we’ll do, we split that into starters, main courses, younger guests, sort of children between the ages of 7 and 14, [...] the under-fives, side orders, which we call extras, and desserts [...] My role in all of this is to estimate how many people, what percentage of people will have which dish, and we call that sales mix [...] this is where [starter] penetration comes in.5 [He points at a large spreadsheet.] This is the total number of people coming into [Restaurant Division], I am predicting that 61.8% of all people who come into [Restaurant Division] will have a starter [...] or, 11.9% will have a soup. That’s partly because it’s the cheapest dish on the menu [...] It’s also very seasonal, like soup goes up in winter and down in the summer, so there’s that sort of factor to consider as well. So, I predict each individual dish. So, we have a target in terms of overall penetration, obviously main course and younger guests is going to be 100%, we assume that everyone who comes into [Restaurant Division] will have a main course. And then about 61% will have a starter, somewhere in the region of 17% will have a side order, and about 62% will have a dessert. Marketing planning manager Achieving the target food margin of the menu as whole, given the marketing objectives, required considerable analysis of the financial profile of the individual dishes. Calculative rules and routines 4 Gross profit margin on food was calculated in terms of contribution (i.e. revenue minus food costs). Hereafter, we refer to it simply as food margin. 5 Much emphasis was placed on starter penetration because starters had greater percentage food margins than main courses and they were an important way of increasing spend per head. T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 17 Author's personal copy quickly became bound up with collective normative assessments of customers perceptions of value for money. [...] if you’re selling a main course for £15 then looking to make 75% margin on that might be a little bit greedy whereas if you’re selling something for £6 maybe you should be looking to make 75% margin. Commercial manager [...] now, another thing is price points, making sure we’ve got a range of products within £6–7, making sure that we are not shifting prices up too far. We are concerned with value for money, we don’t want to push prices too high. Marketing planning manager The calculation of an overall target margin for a menu does demonstrate the combinability (Robson, 1992) of diverse dish characteristics as inscriptions of revenue and cost. However, in practice, the functionality of such inscriptions for the practice of menu design did not lie primarily in being Latourian ‘‘immutable mobiles’’ through which senior managers exercised control at a distance. Evaluations of price, value for money, branding, logistical and operational appropriateness were subject to ongoing debate and continually reworked through an ongoing array of activities. The financial parameters of individual dish designs inscribed in the head office spreadsheet were thus results of discussions and negotiations through which the marketing planning manager sought to co-ordinate the financial performance of the overall menu. This involved an array of activity stretching over multiple participants within Restaurant Division, its suppliers, and customers over successive menu periods. So [the commercial analyst], having decided we want a steak and kidney pie, and that it should be something that we would want to sell for £8.99, and therefore this is the sort of cost we would be looking for, [...] would then brief [the buyer] on that, and she would go off and brief suppliers [...] Commercial manager [...] the items that tend to be higher margin are the ones that have been on the menu for some considerable time, therefore have achieved economies of scale through our suppliers because they got better at making them. And also we buy in bulk, so get a reasonable discount. Whereas with new products we try them first in certain areas, therefore buying a lot less quantity. Marketing planning manager The work of co-ordinating various dish-related activities around the menu design process was complicated by the fact that each dish could only contribute to profitability as part of the overall menu. Was a dish underperforming because it was expensive or unappealing, or because there were there too many similar dishes on the menu? Were dishes set against other dishes that offered a much better value proposition? Could the price (and margin) of a dish be reduced such that its increased volume increased organisational profits without poaching custom from other high margin dishes? Could those volume increases be translated into bulk buying discounts which would partly offset the margin losses? Through the activities that were concerned with answering such questions, distinctive functional understandings were brought to bear on the organisational objectives of profitability and brand management. The shaded boxes that highlighted certain dishes on the menu were an illustrative example. Restaurant Division managers had found out that putting a shaded box under a menu item increased its sales. From the point of view of the finance managers it would have made sense to highlight the high-margin items. But that did not happen. The marketing managers had argued that doing so would increase the sale of dishes that most customers would not regard as good value for money. On average they would leave the restaurant feeling that they were overcharged and would not return. Therefore, the boxes actually highlighted the bestselling items. The rationale was that the boxes would help undecided customers choose what most people liked, thereby, on average, contributing to satisfying those customers. Menu design as management control practice meant ensuring that besides yielding good financial performance of the dishes as a group, new 18 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy menus reflected, but also developed further, the tastes of Restaurant Division’s customers. During our research an important menu design objective was, for example, to begin to ‘‘Italianise’’ a still overwhelmingly traditional British menu. This involved [...] deciding, you know, whether we’ve got too many chickens [chicken dishes], or, you know, need another vegetarian. Commercial manager [The commercial analyst] would work with [suppliers] to come up with a product that looked like the sort of thing we wanted. [Our buyer] is a food-eater, white-coat person and understands all these technical things like, you know, you put some paprika on top of it and it’ll brown in the oven better. Commercial manager Central to the practice of menu design and management were an ongoing refinement of understanding customer expectations as much as an active management of those expectations (Ahrens & Chapman, 2005). Designing a new menu thus brought together a multitude of perspectives and possibilities. In following the activities involved we see how Restaurant Division’s strategic agenda was enacted in situation-specific ways. In the process of menu design abstract strategic notions such as ‘‘We must Italianise our menu’’ took on concrete form through the attempt to introduce specific dishes that might contribute to achieving this end. Whichever came first, a dish suggested by suppliers, or a calculative spreadsheet entry that triggered a call to suppliers to meet a new found need, the dish and its calculative presence in the spreadsheet became mutually constitutive during the menu design process. As a factor in the financial calculus of the target margin a new dish emerged from arrays of dish design, market research, and budgeting activities. Those chains of action were skilfully organised through arrays of understandings, rules, and engagements, constituting the practice of management control. In turn, the design of the management control systems—that is, management control practices plus material and technical arrangements, such as the electronic dish database—sought to arrange the understandings, rules, and engagements that organised the organisational members’ actions. Management control functioned as structures of intentionality, not coercively, but by enabling (Ahrens & Chapman, 2004) the managers in Restaurant Division to think through the strategic potential of past and potential actions. Management control practices in restaurants Management control activity in the restaurants focussed on the weekly business development meetings between restaurant managers and their area managers. These provided a regular opportunity to discuss a standard commercial agenda, including financial information, kitchen, bar, and restaurant operation, personnel issues, customer satisfaction and ratings, local competitor activity, etc. Most restaurant and area managers whom we met, regarded going through the standard commercial agenda as a helpful rule for the business development meetings that helped them in their objective of meeting the restaurants’ budgets. It was understood that the role of the area manager in business development meetings was ambivalent, frequently moving between coach, mentor, and enforcer in just one meeting. The following are excerpts from a business development meeting that took place in restaurant #1 between the area manager and the couple who managed it, Janet and Andrew. Area Manager: What happened to your food margin? [Regional manager] said, this is rubbish. Janet: We had a problem with charcoaled [burnt] steaks... AM: Did you log that? Janet: I’ve got a restaurant log [for recording the loss of high value food items like steak]. [...] AM: When was the last time you went through the specs [dish size and ingredients specifications] with the kitchen team. [...] They’re over-portioning somewhere. T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 19 Author's personal copy Andrew: I’m wondering what it is... AM: ... The waitresses know that big desserts mean big tips. A specs check with kitchen staff is always good. Lots of opportunities for savings. You made some good savings in the lower parts of the P & L. You need to keep that going. [...] Use the Gold Scheme [divisional service quality scheme] to set targets and link it in. And in August set new targets [...] We don’t need new customers, we need to mug the ones we’ve got. Sell more desserts, wine... Janet: Maybe get a drinks waiter who goes around... [...] AM: Profit conversion was brilliant last week. [X]% last week. Janet: What about the price banding for drinks from September? AM: [Pub Division] have gone up 4 pence per pint, but nothing is set in stone on pricing. [...] We don’t need to be cheaper, no point, it’s not driving sales. In this conversation the participants identified chains of activities, such as advising, signalling concern, demonstrating willingness to improve, prioritising information, motivating, framing local issue in the strategic context, etc., all geared towards enabling Janet and Andrew to meet, or possibly exceed, their restaurant budget. Diverse pieces of information on the food margin, the profit and loss account, human resource management practices, and pricing were mobilised in order to support recommendations for improving restaurant management. Whether or not they were mobilised depended on their perceived functionality for improvements. Discussions of financial results and their causes iterated rapidly with proposals for concrete activity. Through such interactions organizational members constituted the practice of management control as skilful practical activity. Area manager: There is healthy sales growth. Janet: The flyers are down in the bed and breakfast down the road. AM: You done that? How do you measure it? Janet: I put a stamp on the back. We also gave privilege cards to big companies. AM: It is difficult to get out of those later. It is better to have vouchers, something personalised. Andrew: We could do that. AM: It is just something that worked well for [other restaurant]. [...] AM: The school thing6 worked well. What do you have to follow it up? Janet: School visit? Halloween party? Bonfire? [...] AM: Anything else on sales? Janet: The Summer-Funday-Sunday! I just need to order a Caribbean kit please. We’re planning a low-key, family-type disco. AM: You should set some financial targets for that. Sales... Janet: Yes. Andrew: And we do cocktails and stuff... AM: Yeah, I get the flavour. Andrew: And prizes to give away... [...] Janet and her area manager wanted other restaurant staff to understand the ways in which individual local activity might be orchestrated in line with Restaurant Division’s service quality objectives. AM: The service quality report is good. No comparison to what we had in January [...] Give your staff a bit of a lift, don’t wait for the official [announcement from head office]. Janet: It’s been a good piece of work in hard times. AM: Have you done something like key tasks for Linda [support manager]? Give her a training plan. Better still Janet: [interrupts] Get her to do it. They agreed that Linda should develop an induction programme for herself. AM: From her point of view, what’s the benefit? Janet: She can tick things off. AM: What’s the danger? Janet: She’s not learning it really. 6 Local school children had decorated an artificial tree in the restaurant with butterflies that they had made in class. 20 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy This discussion gave insight into the practical effects of Restaurant Division’s management control systems as structures of intentionality and the skills of the restaurant and area managers at mobilising them for their diverse ends. As with the menu design process, the management control systems provided the motivation, timing, and the fundamental parameters of this conversation. Conceived of as an array of activity that was distributed over all of the division’s restaurants, area and restaurant managers, performance reports, and movements of physical inventory through the kitchens, etc., the conducting of business development meetings was a practice which was defined by, but also developed further, certain understandings, rules, and ends, thereby clarifying important aspects of the roles to which individual restaurant managers aspired as well as their relationships with their area manager. Whilst working within a nexus of practices and arrangements that had great influence over how food was prepared and service delivered in order to meet business objectives, individual restaurant managers retained distinctive yet systematic ideas about their own restaurant management activities. In discussions with us, and their peers, they would frequently compare and contrast their current and past restaurants in terms of their preferred management style. By all accounts, the couple in restaurant #2 represented an extreme approach to restaurant management. One of the many husband and wife management teams in Restaurant Division, Armando and Elena had worked for the company for 18 years. Their enthusiasm had earned them a reputation for opening new Restaurant Division outlets and building the business to maturity until another manager could take it over from them. ‘‘If Elena lets me, I will have one more go at opening the perfect [Restaurant Division outlet].’’ They also had a reputation for overspending on food and labour. You can grow a business or kill a business... Managers who are running a food surplus underportion or serve rubbish. In the five years we were at [newly opened restaurant] our food deficit was £2500 per year. We had a deficit of £50 per week. You will see kitchens where the chef goes ‘ooops the beans are too soft... just serve them...’ Waste will happen with human error! It’s panic! Now there is one ticket,7 suddenly there are ten!8 ... Our chef in [newly opened restaurant] had 23 years experience. We paid him £23,000 a year flat salary.9 Without a chef you’re going nowhere. I don’t care about costs, we need good chefs! You get what you pay for and you got to pay them a living wage. Armando, restaurant manager Alistair, another restaurant manager in the South East of England, had adopted a very different management approach, but still regarded Armando and Elena very highly. ‘‘They are the best managers in the South East. Wherever they go they get a lot of business.’’ His own approach, however, differed markedly. He distanced himself from the work in the restaurant that he managed. ‘‘It’s not my business. I get paid for doing a job.’’ He was one of the few managers whose wife was not also working for the restaurant and who lived away from the restaurant and not in one of the flats that were usually located on the first floor above the restaurant. There is a real danger of developing blinkers, getting too involved [in the restaurant]. You must keep your eyes on the whole business, not get sucked in. You can get away with being involved in a smaller place but [not] when you manage somewhere bigger [...] Alistair, restaurant manager Achieving the target labour cost percentage of sales was an important priority for most of the restaurant managers and all area managers with whom we spoke. But again, restaurant managers 7 A slip that summarises the order of one table. It is printed in the kitchen after a waiter has entered the order into the till. 8 A common expression amongst Restaurant Division staff was the ‘‘Ten-Ticket-Chef’’. It referred to a chef who would keep calm under mounting orders and ‘‘just bang out those dishes’’ to standard dish specification. 9 This compares with £25,000 per year as the lower bound of the restaurant managers fixed salary range in 1997. T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 21 Author's personal copy had developed distinctive practices for achieving the percentage in conjunction with their other particular objectives. For Alistair it was important to delegate session control to his department heads in the kitchen, the restaurant, bar and cellar. He sought to minimise his own interference in their departments. Armando and Elena, by contrast, were too concerned with perfecting the service in their restaurant, and with avoiding staff turnover, to let staff learn from their own mistakes. When we opened here we took on inexperienced but polite staff... We helped them out when they struggled and now they still rely on us. Armando, restaurant manager The skill of restaurant management lay in developing workable practices out of diverse combinations of restaurant specific resources and constraints. Concerns with the chains of activity required for food preparation, for example, could thus affect restaurant management practices in ways that we would a priori have expected to be dominated by more abstract concerns with dish profitability. Talking about how to assemble a set menu for coach parties that would use a restaurant for lunch on a day trip, Geoff, the manager of restaurant #3, said that ‘‘we do what’s easiest for the chef’’. Instead of using the dish margin data, he and his wife saw coach parties primarily in terms of the dynamics of large groups. A successful restaurant visit by a coach party was one in which the lunch service contributed to a good social atmosphere. The set menu needed to offer an attractive, if restricted, choice of dishes and it needed to be ‘‘manufacturable’’ to serve everyone at the same time. Likewise, the management and control of spaces turned out to be a key consideration in restaurant managers’ efforts to run a profitable restaurant. Restaurant managers reflected on the ‘‘yardage’’ they felt different waiters were able to cover, as much as on the proximities and compatibilities between groups of guests that were characterised by their noisiness and desires for continuous supplies of alcoholic drinks. Restaurant managers controlled spaces by appearing unexpectedly at the side of the grill controller who coordinated the movements of waiters between the kitchen and their tables, next to an overworked grill chef in the kitchen, or behind the bar. They complained about the layout of restaurants which, they felt, required them to be in too many places at the same time, if, say, the guest reception desk was on the ground floor and a series of separate dining rooms on the first floor. Restaurant management practice entailed the physical presence to the managers to survey, remind, and reassure groups of staff and guests. Management control practice consisted of targeted, but ultimately unpredictable, chains of action that were distributed over people, spaces, processes, and information. This distribution was not limited to single restaurants. It was a collective endeavour that extended across the chain. In the coffee breaks of training workshops we observed some of the ways in which restaurant managers of neighbouring restaurants swapped scarce inventory items. Restaurant managers in the same areas exchanged tips on how to make new dishes, like cre`me bruˆle´e, work. They kept each other informed on how customers reacted to new dishes that they suspected were badly designed by head office. Exchanges such as these allow us to speak of Restaurant Division’s management control practice as a category that was made up of organisationally characteristic activities in many sites. What made them characteristic were the meanings with which organisational members invested them, the rules they considered, and their various engagements with particular objectives, uses, emotions, etc. We are here not referring to repeated activity, as one might when discussing routines, but meaningfully related activity that transpires as (and thereby helps compose) practice. By highlighting the ways in which practice is made up of arrays of activity, Schatzki’s (2002) concept of practice makes visible orders that are constituted by, rather than smother, expressions of individual agency. Diverse forms of managerial power ran through Restaurant Division’s organisational practices. As one restaurant manager put it, ‘‘if you enter your closing inventory and your food margin is way out, you can expect an unpleasant visit from your area manager first thing Monday morning.’’ Depending on circumstances and personalities, 22 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy area managers could coach restaurant managers to think through their priorities and options as seen in the conversation observed in restaurant #1. Alternatively, they reduced individual restaurant managers to tears or meted out a collective dressing down via email or at area meetings. Such crude displays of power were performed with reference to the management control systems’ structures of intentionality. By the same token, reference to commercial success could (temporarily) work to invert the formal hierarchy. Very good chefs could extract high salaries from their restaurant managers, just as commercially successful restaurant managers could attain legendary status even if there was widely shared, but unproven, suspicion that they ‘‘ripped off the company’’ by keeping a share of the revenues to themselves. He’s been delivering on budget year after year—it’s uncanny. [...] the company has sort of accepted that he gives us more profit than anyone else could, so... Financial controller In most day-to-day interactions, however, area managers’ ability to define what counted as commercial success in the context of the complex relationships between financial and non-financial information constituted an important source of their power. Senior managers’ practice-view of management control From a practice point of view, the role of the board of directors was not simply a matter of blueprint design and the writing of policies. Rather, it was a question of developing arrays of activity and understandings that organised the activities of other organisational members—the manifesting of structures of intentionality—knowing full well that those activities were, and should be, informed acts of skilful practical activity more than expressions of routine understandings of restaurant management. When we began our research, the senior management of Restaurant Division felt that they played a key role in leading a growth strategy. Having joined the organisation almost two years before being interviewed, [The managing director] and I had a totally different brief [from the previous board of directors] when we were brought in January ’94. We were told to go back to being much more expansionist, both physically, so in other words go out now and buy some sites, and mentally, let’s start trying lots of things, let’s start recognising that we did great for those three years at [...] taking no risks basically. We now take risks, otherwise [Restaurant Division] will die as a brand. Operations director With their specific strategic brief in mind, senior managers’ saw that ‘‘going for growth’’ had wideranging implications for operations, and the ways in which restaurant managers should think about the nature of the business. In a chain organisation, which was used to ‘‘pretty bureaucratic, autocratic process management’’, they saw their task in bringing about management control systems that would help restaurant managers develop answers to questions such as, how do you grow? What are the symptoms, what happens to an organisation to say [we are now] customer led, market led, watch out for the competition coming round the corner because, again, historically [the competition had been weak]. Managing director The board agreed that this presented a significant communication challenge. Restaurant Division belonged to one of the UK’s largest leisure groups, with demanding financial targets. But financial objectives, such as food margin, on their own were not regarded as suitable for getting across the board’s expectations to the rest of the organisation. They were an important motivation for head office’s strategic concerns but, on their own, they could not be used to explain those concerns to Restaurant Division’s organisational members. An important attempt at communicating head office’s strategic priorities to the organisation was the list of specific measures known as the ‘‘13 Key Tasks’’ (see Appendix A for details). Whilst T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 23 Author's personal copy senior managers did elaborate the significance of specific and concrete relationships that they felt were important in understanding the nature of Restaurant Division (e.g. the relationship between high gross profit margin and superior customer service), they were not directly concerned with the elaboration of a concise business model. Instead they sought to create a general awareness of strategic priorities that they hoped might infuse locally appropriate activity. You know that 13 key tasks is an almost ludicrous number. They are 13 key tasks in the sense that they are 13 areas on which we need to focus during the year. And that’s what we are trying to say to people... We are going to do TV advertising, and therefore we need to know how we will know if that’s worked. Now if you are a [restaurant] manager it’s not a key task. It’s going to happen whether you... What it’s saying is be aware we’re going to be having more customers and new customers so get your service quality s*** together. So the issue is if you are a house manager your issues are service quality and profit, that’s it, but you need to know that we’re going on Carlton and Granada.10 Acquisitions, if you are a [restaurant] manager who is not moving to a new acquisition, it is not an issue for you in the slightest bit. What we’re saying is that as a company you should be aware that we’re trying to open 15 [restaurants] [...] Because if you are aware of that you know the company’s growing, so there’s an information comfort there, you’re in a growing company. Secondly if you’re driving down the road and there’s a site, then maybe that could be a [possible site for a new Restaurant Division outlet]. Thirdly if the [restaurant] is opening in your area, then we probably want you to help by taking some of the new staff into your [restaurant for initial training]. So it’s not a key task for you if you’re not going into one, but you need to be aware that that’s where we’re going. Human resources director The human resources director’s explanations of the significance of non-financial management control systems offered a refreshing contrast with contemporary musings on the topic. His account of the possible uses of the ‘‘13 Key Tasks’’ were a reflection of head office management’s sensitivity to the connections that they wanted organisational members to make between performance metrics, Restaurant Division’s strategic agenda, and restaurant management issues in the shaping of daily activity. Management control information was only seen to be useful in the context of specific managerial intent (c.f., Barnes, 2001). In the previous quotation we saw that the specifics of performance metrics might provide a framework for the articulation of managerial agendas. In turn, managerial intent simultaneously shaped the selective attention required for the overwhelmingly detailed monthly management information pack to effectively contribute to management control practice. Are you taking about data? ... We have, I never go anywhere without it, but I mean we have... where is my Period 7? [searches for report] There it is! Right, Period 7 [heaves weighty report onto his desk], and I’ve got everything in there, all the financial detail [starts leafing fast through the report], and I’ve got all the stock, food data, I’ve got all the distribution account, I’ve got the balance sheet, I’ve got our service quality information, complaints, complaint ratios to covers, how each region is doing, ah, top ten, bottom ten, ahm, on growth, on service quality, I’ve got, ahm, food quality data, I’ve got ahm, you know, financial, MAT11 information on food, liquor, etc. [...] spend per head, liquor spend per head, sales mix, TV advertising data, then you move into labour turn..., human resources information, labour turnover by region, by category of employee, ahm, etc. [keeps leafing through pages] ahm [interviewer tries to interrupt] staff turnover, support manager turnover, 10 Two important television advertising regions in the UK. 11 Moving average total. 24 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy ahm, people moves from one restaurant to another, ahm, training data, ah, I’ve got information on the training centre, the training report, so we go into my budgetary responsibility, which is obviously the HR budget, how that’s doing, blablablabla [keeps leafing]. Human resources director Head office managers were under no illusion that their strategic visions would easily ‘‘translate’’ into managerial actions throughout the organisation. They never suggested straightforward relationships between management control information and organisational activity (c.f., Bloch, 1991). For them the larger management control challenge lay in the creation of roles and forums in which complex understandings of the ways in which the strategic agenda of the Division might feed into day-to-day activity would be fostered through dialogues that might open up events depicted through the performance data. Without wishing to relinquish their strategic or hierarchical prerogatives, they were sensitive to the benefits of an approach to management control that sought to reckon with the intelligence of managers—to enable them (Ahrens & Chapman, 2004). Discussion In a restaurant chain, in which direct food costs constituted the largest single operating expense, the food margin reporting system, which was based on the division-wide menu, took on a particular significance. Through a detailed discussion of menu design practice we saw that based on the high level parameters set out by the board of directors, the marketing planning manager was implicated in a complex array of financial, logistical, marketing, and operational activities and objectives. The strategic agenda set out by head office staff provided a starting point in the process of menu design, offering a series of targets (e.g. attain 67.3% food margin, Italianise the menu, etc.). These targets provided a poor basis for understanding management control in Restaurant Division however, since targets on their own did not provide for an understanding of their practical effects in all but the simplest of settings. In Restaurant Division, a target food margin might be achieved in any number of ways, as might introducing a more Italian flavour to the menu. A practice perspective offers a way of understanding the diverse activities involved in menu design in relation to each other as an array of activity. Through such analysis we can see the way in which the precise nature of objectives (Italianising the menu) arises from daily activity as much as daily activity is shaped by those objectives. Likewise in the weekly business development meetings, restaurant managers and their area managers reviewed restaurant operations and discussed the possibilities implied by management control information. Over the course of their careers restaurant managers built up their own understandings of restaurant operation which provided them with a ready source of ideas on how to manage their restaurant. Area managers were to facilitate the achievement of corporate objectives through the construction of arrays of activity that incorporated these with the restaurant managers’ personal understandings. They were supported in this task by a series of division-wide financial control workshops that propagated an enabling vision of management control systems (Ahrens & Chapman, 2004). Focussing on the specifics of management activity our account foregrounded the ways in which various managers constructed purposeful chains of activity stretching widely across the organisation. We sought to bring out the ways in which those purposes might more instructively be thought of as an accomplishment of those actors however, informed by but also constructive of the financial and strategic imperatives advertised by senior management. The key assumptions underlying senior management’s understandings of their own tasks and activities were very similar to the practice theory outlined in this paper. The priorities of different objectives were contingent on ongoing developments. Performance information was regarded as complexly interwoven with organisational context. The functionality of performance information was paramount to senior management but they were keenly aware that their notions of functionality were highly context specific. T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 25 Author's personal copy Management control as a practice unfolds its potential through the ways in which organisational members draw on it as a shared resource. In seeking to develop our understanding of the ways in which management control in Restaurant Division stretches across diverse practices and arrangements we found it useful to build on theories of cognition in practice. In contrast with, notably, Hutchins’ (1995a, 1995b) work on cognition in practice in airplane cockpits and the command bridges of ships, we addressed task contexts that were characterised by diverse ideas about the organisation’s objectives (and subsets of objectives) and the best ways of attaining them. Management control is grounded in the power of senior managers to set agendas, the management control systems through which they seek to structure organisational practices, and the responses of organisational members. As a structure of intentionality, management control is constituted in cognitive processes that are distributed over people, practices, arrangements, and contexts. Conclusions It is often not easy to determine what bearing the diverse purposes of organisations have on the activities of their members. Central to understanding organisation as practice are the structures of intentionality, as they arise from the understandings, rules, and teleoaffective structures of practice, that organise connected activities and arrangements. Management control practices are central to organising because they help to bring about connections between the diverse activities of organisational members. Unlike the communities of practice literature, which has shed light on the development of specific spheres of activities within organisations (e.g., Lave & Wenger, 1991; Orr, 1996), management control as practice seeks to understand a wider and more complex field of organising practices. The notion of structures of intentionality relies on a conception of functionality that is cognitively distributed over people, practices, arrangements, and contexts (Hutchins, 1995; Lave, 1988), and thus situated. What is and is not functional can only be taken for granted in situations so simple and stable that they make few demands on organisational skills. The concept of accounting and management control practice that we seek to outline in this paper is all too aware of accounting’s diverse meanings in the political processes that surround its uses to submit to the functionalist paradigm of schematic ends, means, and implementations. Yet at the same time, we do not think that technical conceptions of accounting are simply unrealistic dreams. For the managers in Restaurant Division, functionality was inherently practical. For example, enhancing the representational faithfulness of accounting systems was not their major concern. The managers mostly seemed to regard their accounting systems as imperfect but adequate for the task of rendering visible organisational members’ daily activity through accounting inscriptions. For them, the main use of past performance evaluation lay in its potential to help construct future lines of action. To this end they were happy to work with approximate representations of physical and financial flows. We saw that in actively working with other organisational members in order to establish a shared understanding of what it meant to do well, they drew on, but were not captured by, performance metrics. The meanings of diverse objectives (and performance metrics) for the activities of organisational members only became clear to them through ongoing contextualisation. Function and symbol cannot but intermingle. This has implications for our understanding of the relationship between control and strategy. The arrays of activity that constitute practices do not map neatly onto strategic plans. Doings and sayings are fundamentally different activities (Bloch, 1991). The notion of strategy implementation is often misleading in this respect (Ahrens & Chapman, 2005), as is being recognised in discussions of strategy as practice (e.g., Whittington, 2006). Likewise, our practice perspective highlights some problematic assumptions that underlie contemporary discussions of the spread of innovative management accounting practices. In the case of 26 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy the ‘‘transfer’’ of best practices from organisations to the academic literature, a familiar tale is that of the field researcher stumbling over an innovative practice that she merely documents to aid its dissemination amongst practitioners and academics (Kaplan, 1994). ‘‘We just had to recognise a valid solution when it appeared’’ (Kaplan, 1998, p. 98). Such tales are misleading insofar as they appeal to readily articulated, distinct practices ‘‘out there in the field’’. In reality the discursive boundaries of innovative practices tend to be blurred. The key to understanding practices lies in the careful tracing of their constitutive activities. Furthermore, theoretical accounting concepts cannot be used by practitioners as ‘‘means’’ to pursue their ‘‘ends’’ because means and ends are constructed simultaneously in practice (Lave, 1988). This is not to subscribe to the concept of emergent strategy (Mintzberg, Raisinghani, & Theoret, 1976). Emergent strategy foregrounds local initiative, serendipity, and adjustment to context. Situated functionality emphasises the potential of senior management to support local managers’ attempts at pursuing diverse central objectives in local contexts. Such harnessing of local management efforts usually requires great skill and is highly context dependent. A detailed case description is the best approach to study it, but it is important to be aware of its limitations. Our description followed the various leads given to us by the members of the case organisation and our own surprises at the activities and arrangements in this organisation and the industry more widely. By developing our case description in terms of ordered activities and arrangements we sought to delineate the arrays of activity that constituted management control practice in Restaurant Division. We hope to have rendered a plausible account that built on our observations and insights into the diverse intentions of organisational members. Ultimately, however, we acknowledge the primacy of practice (Archer, 2000). Practices are never fully articulated. The textual representation of our field material can only be suggestive of actual ongoing practice, because practice is sensitive to minute variations in its components (over which cognition in practice stretches). Description can illuminate activity, but activity cannot be reduced to description. For practice theorists social order is real in the sense that activities belong to practices and that practices and arrangements can be identified as sustaining or changing one another. However, social order is much more complex than simply the reproduction of action or values. Instead, social order arises from actors’ ongoing efforts at developing their actions as part of certain fields of practices, that is to say, with reference to the fields’ understandings, rules, and engagements. Actors may want their actions to blend in or stand out depending on their judgement of what the situation calls for. Practices are thus constituted by ‘‘tangle[s] of samenesses and similarities’’ (Schatzki, 2001, p. 42). The connection between fellow practitioners and their practices cannot be mechanical, relying simply on repeated activity; what has sometimes been referred to as routines. Rather, practices depend on the intended, meaningful relatedness between activities with respect to outcomes, clients, practitioners, techniques, resources, strategies, institutions, etc. The ongoing debates around the concept of culture have highlighted the dangers of assuming that encompassing sociological notions can explain all aspects of social life (e.g., Biernacki, 1999; Roseberry, 1982; Swidler, 1986). The notion of practice in this paper offers purchase on a wide range of social phenomena. Yet we need to spell out clearly what is not practice. Practice is shaped through purposeful activity and as a concept seeks to capture actors’ skilful working with and constructing of understandings, rules, and engagements. The concept is not suitable for analysing situations that are characterised by an absence of volition and choice. It has little to add to our understanding of strict rule-following behaviour. Practice also does not sit comfortably with notions of behaviour determined by self-referencing interest, or by a priori structural conflict. When understandings, rules, objectives, and values are understood as acting upon actors, the diversity of organisational responses to control is often cast in terms of resistance. Management T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 27 Author's personal copy control systems are certainly used in efforts at securing the interests of remote managers or shareholders, but the real difficulty for management control practice lies in determining what activities can support such ends, how such activities are to be brought about throughout the organisation, and how such activities can help recast organisational ends. Practice theory is not blind to conflict but it does not cast it in terms of control and resistance. As such the key question for management control theory is not how to constrain individuals and overcome resistance. Rather, it needs to bring into focus the possibilities of management control systems as a resource for action. Practice theory emphasises the role of actors in drawing upon the rules, procedures, ideals, targets, etc. of management control practice because interest and conflict are not given. They are discursive and practical resources that actors manipulate skilfully to signal interests, motivations, and achievements. Our practice perspective emphasises the ways in which those motivations come to be constructed through the daily effort of individuals engaging with each other and management control systems. Our emphasis on individual skill and intention, and the complex and ongoing working out of structures of intent has a direct bearing on the debate around the capabilities and limits of management control systems. This debate has developed an unhelpful dynamic between the writing and thinking of academics and practitioners and, related to this, between notions of individual agency, social norms, and control. Put crudely, the normative literature, posing as practically relevant, has often emphasised agency over context and succumbed to ‘hero sociology’ (Law, 1991). The more sociologically grounded literature has frequently offered practitioners little advice beyond emphasising the complexities of purposeful management control. The contribution of practice theory to this debate lies in pro- viding a language for talking about skilful practical activity in context recognising the constitution of context through action. Rather than take the much observed fluidity and unpredictability of management accounting and control in practice as a sign of the feebleness of accounting theory we should adjust our notion of theory such that it becomes more suitable for the study of practice. Acknowledgement We gratefully acknowledge the comments on earlier drafts of this paper from Fiona AndersonGough, Wai Fong Chua, David Cooper, Niels Dechow, Anthony Hopwood, Michael Lounsbury, Michal Matejka, Peter Miller, Jan Mouritsen, Mike Power, Paolo Quattrone, Steve Salterio, Tomo Suzuki, Richard Whittington, and Steve Woolgar. We would particularly like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for their many helpful comments and suggestions. Appendix A. The thirteen key tasks 28 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy References Ahrens, T., & Chapman, C. S. (2000). Occupational identity of management accountants in Britain and Germany. European Accounting Review, 9(4), 477–498. Ahrens, T., & Chapman, C. S. (2002). The structuration of legitimate performance measures and management: day-today contests of accountability in a UK restaurant chain. Management Accounting Research, 13(2), 151–171. Ahrens, T., & Chapman, C. S. (2004). Accounting for flexibility and efficiency: a field study of management control systems in a restaurant chain. Contemporary Accounting Research, 21(2), 271–301. Ahrens, T., & Chapman, C. S. (2005). Accounting and the crafting of strategy: a practice-based view. In C. S. Chapman (Ed.), Management accounting and strategy (pp. 106–124). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Ahrens, T., & Dent, J. F. (1998). Accounting and organizations: realizing the richness of field research. Journal of Management Accounting Research, 10, 1–39. Alac, M., & Hutchins, E. (2004). I see what you are saying: action as cognition in fMRI brain mapping practice. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 4(3), 629–662. Ansari, S., & Euske, K. (1987). Rational, rationalizing, and reifying uses of accounting data in organizations. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 12(6), 549–570. Archer, M. S. (2000). Being human: the problem of agency. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Bariff, M., & Galbraith, J. R. (1978). Intraorganizational power considerations for designing information systems. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 3(1), 15–27. Barnes, B. (2001). Practice as collective action. In T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina, & E. von Savigny (Eds.), The practice turn in contemporary theory (pp. 17–28). London: Routledge. Berry, A. J., Capps, T., Cooper, D., Ferguson, P., Hopper, T., & Lowe, E. A. (1985). Management control in an area of the NCB: Rationales of accounting practices in a public enterprise. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 10(1), 3–28. Biernacki, R. (1999). Method and metaphor after the new cultural history. In V. E. Bonnell & L. Hunt (Eds.), Beyond the cultural turn: New directions in the study of society and culture (pp. 62–92). Berkeley CA: University of California Press. Bloch, M. (1991). Language, anthropology and cognitive science. Man, 183–198. Bloomfield, B. P., Coombs, R., Cooper, D. J., & Rea, D. (1992). Machines and manoeuvre: responsibility accounting and the construction of hospital information systems. Accounting, Management and Information Technology, 2, 197–219. Boland, R., & Pondy, L. (1983). Accounting in organizations: a union of natural and rational perspectives. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 8(2/3), 223–245. Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a theory of practice (R. Nice, Trans.), Vol. 16. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Bower, J. (1970). Managing the resource allocation process. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Briers, M., & Chua, W. F. (2001). The role of actor networks and boundary objects in management accounting change. A field study of an implementation of activity-based costing. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 26(3), 237–269. Brunsson, N. (1990). Deciding for responsibility and legitimization: alternative interpretations of organizational. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 15(1/2), 47–60. Burchell, S., Clubb, C., & Hopwood, A. G. (1985). Accounting in its social context: towards a history of value-added in the United Kingdom. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 10(4), 381–413. Burchell, S., Clubb, C., Hopwood, A. G., Hughes, J., & Nahapiet, N. (1980). The roles of accounting in organizations and society. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 5(1), 5–27. Child, J. (1972). Organizational structure, environment and performance: the role of strategic choice. Sociology, 6, 1–22. Chua, W. F. (1995). Experts, networks and inscriptions in the fabrication of accounting images: a story of the representation of three public hospitals. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 20(2/3), 111–145. Cohen, M., March, J. G., & Olson, J. (1972). A garbage can model of organizational choice. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17(1), 1–25. Cooper, D. (1980). Discussion of towards a political economy of accounting. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 5(1), 161–166. Dechow, N., & Mouritsen, J. (2005). On enterprise resource planning systems: the quest for integration and management control. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 30(7–8), 691–733. Den Hertog, J. F. (1978). The role of information and control systems in the process of organizational renewal: roadblock or road bridge? Accounting, Organizations and Society, 3(1), 29–45. Dent, J. F. (1986). Organisational research in accounting: perspectives, issues and a commentary. In M. Bromwich & A. G. Hopwood (Eds.), Research and current issues in management accounting. London: Pitman. Dreyfus, H., & Dreyfus, S. (1988). Mind over machine: the power of human intuition and expertise in the era of the computer (2nd ed.). New York: Free Press. Ezzamel, M., & Bourn, M. (1990). The roles of accounting information systems in an organization experiencing financial crisis. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 15(5), 399–424. Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society: outline of the theory of structuration. Cambridge: Polity Press. Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 606–633. Hedberg, B., & Jo¨nsson, S. (1978). Designing semi-confusing information systems for organizations in changing environments. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 3(1), 47– 64. Hedberg, B., Nystrom, C., & Starbuck, W. (1976). Camping on seesaws: prescriptions for self-designing organization. Administrative Science Quarterly, 21(1), 41–66. T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 29 Author's personal copy Hopwood, A. G. (1987). The archaeology of accounting systems. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 12(3), 207–234. Hopwood, A. G. (1989). Organisational contingencies and accounting configurations. In B. Fridman, L. Ostman (Eds.), Accounting development-some perspectives-in honour of Sven-Eric Johansson (pp. 23–44) Stockholm. Hopwood, A. G., & Miller, P. (Eds.). (1994). Accounting as social and institutional practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hoskin, K. W., & Macve, R. H. (1986). Accounting and the examination: a genealogy of disciplinary power. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 11(2), 105–136. Hoskin, K. W., & Macve, R. H. (1988). The genesis of accountability: the west point connections. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 13(1), 37–73. Hutchins, E. (1995a). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Hutchins, E. (1995b). How a cockpit remembers its speeds. Cognitive Science, 19(3), 265–288. Kaplan, R. S. (1994). Management accounting (1984–1994): development of new practice and theory. Management Accounting Research, 5(3–4), 247–260. Kaplan, R. S. (1998). Innovation action research: creating new management theory and practice. Journal of Management Accounting Research, 10(Fall), 89–118. Kaplan, R. S., & Norton, S. P. (1996). The balanced scorecard: translating strategy into action. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: how to follow scientists and engineers through society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Latour, B. (1996a). Aramis or the love of technology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Latour, B. (1996b). On actor-network theory: a few clarifications. Soziale Welt, 47(4), 369–381. Latour, B. (1999). On recalling ANT. In J. Law & J. Hassard (Eds.), Actor network theory and after (pp. 15–25). Oxford: Blackwell. Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Law, J. (1991). Introduction: monsters, machines and sociotechnical relations. In J. Law (Ed.), A sociology of monsters: Essays on power, technology and domination (pp. 1–25). London: Routledge. Law, J., & Hassard, J. (Eds.). (1999). Actor network theory and after. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. March, J. G. (1987). Ambiguity and accounting: the elusive link between information and decision making. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 12(2), 153–168. Markus, M., & Pfeffer, J. (1983). Power and the design and implementation of accounting and control systems. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 8(2/3), 205–218. Miller, P. (2001). Governing by numbers: Why calculative practices matter. Social Research, 68(2), 379–396. Miller, P., & O’Leary, T. (1987). Accounting and the construction of the governable person. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 12(3), 235–265. Miller, P., & O’Leary, T. (1990). Making accounting practical. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 15(5), 479–498. Miller, P., & O’Leary, T. (1994). Accounting, ‘‘economic citizenship’’ and the spatial reordering of manufacture. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 19(1), 15–43. Miller, P., & Rose, N. (1990). Governing economic life. Economy and Society, 19(1), 1–31. Mintzberg, H., Raisinghani, D., & Theoret, A. (1976). The structure of unstructured decision processes. Administrative Science Quarterly, 21(2), 246–275. Mouritsen, J. (1999). The flexible firm: strategies for a subcontractor’s management control. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 24(1), 31–55. Orr, J. E. (1996). Talking about machines: an ethnography of a modern job. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press. Ortner, S. B. (1984). Theory in Anthropology since the Sixties. Comparative Studies in Society and History, 26(1), 126–166. Pinch, T., Mulkay, M., & Ashmore, M. (1989). Clinical budgeting: experimentation in the social sciences: a drama in five acts. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 14(3), 271–301. Preston, A., Cooper, D., & Coombs, R. W. (1992). Fabricating budgets: a study of the production of management budgeting in the National Health Service. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 17(6), 561–593. Quattrone, P., & Hopper, T. (2005). A ‘time–space odyssey’: management control systems in two multinational organisations. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 30(7–8), 735–764. Radcliffe, V. S. (1998). Efficiency audit: an assembly of rationalities and programmes. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 23(4), 377–410. Robson, K. (1992). Accounting numbers as ‘Inscription’: Action at a distance and the development of accounting. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 17(7), 685–708. Roseberry, W. (1982). Balinese cookfights and the seduction of anthropology. Social Research, 49(4), 1013–1028. Schatzki, T. R. (2001a). Practice mind-ed orders. In T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina, & E. von Savigny (Eds.), The practice turn in contemporary theory (pp. 42–55). London and New York: Routledge. Schatzki, T. R. (2001b). Practice theory: an introduction. In T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina, & E. von Savigny (Eds.), The practice turn in contemporary theory (pp. 1–14). London: Routledge. Schatzki, T. R. (2002). The site of the social: a philosophical account of the constitution of social life and change. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. Schatzki, T. R. (2005). The sites of organizations. Organization Studies, 26(3), 465–484. Simons, R. (1995). Levers of control. Boston: Harvard Business School Press. Star, S. L., & Greisemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, ‘translations’ and boundary objects: amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s museum of vertebrate zoology, 1907– 1939. Social Studies of Science, 19(3), 387–420. 30 T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 Author's personal copy Swidler, A. (1986). Culture in action: symbols and strategies. American Sociological Review, 51(2), 273–286. Swieringa, R., & Weick, K. (1987). Management accounting and action. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 12(3), 293–308. Vera-Mun˜oz, S. (1998). The effects of accounting knowledge and context on the omission of opportunity costs in resource allocation decisions. The Accounting Review, 73(1), 47–72. Vera-Mun˜oz, S., Kinney, W., Jr., & Bonner, S. E. (2001). The effects of domain experience and task presentation formation on accountant’s information relevance assurance. The Accounting Review, 76(3), 405–429. Whittington, R. (2006). Completing the practice turn in strategy research. Organization Studies, 27(5), 613–634. Wildavsky, A. (1978). Policy analysis is what information systems are not. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 3(1), 77–88. Young, J. J. (1996). Institutional thinking: the case of financial instruments. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 21(5), 487–512. T. Ahrens, C.S. Chapman / Accounting, Organizations and Society 32 (2007) 5–31 31